

In our study, we evaluated a novel assay from Qiagen measuring Tcell responses to two SARS-CoV-2 peptide antigen pools (antigen pool 1 and antigen pool 2) in healthy probands vaccinated twice with the Moderna vaccine mRNA-1723 against SARS-CoV-2.We reported that only 8/18 vaccinees tested positive in our cohort when assaying Interferon-ɣ release from lymphocytes.In their letter, Nikolayevskyy et al. wonder if the low positivity rate might be caused by our data analysis, as using OD values instead of IU/ mL might yield different results. They expect a significantly higher positivity rate based on IU/mL. We wish to thank these authors for their useful suggestion. We want to use this opportunity to present our results side-by-side as either "IU/mL" (Fig. 1a) or "OD values" (Fig. 1b) . When comparing Fig. 1a and b, both graphs look pretty similar. Moreover, the previously reported positivity rate of 8/18, for positivity in at least one of the two antigen pools, remains almost unchanged with 8/18 regarding antigen pool 1 (Ag1) and 9/18 regarding antigen pool 2 (Ag2) when using a cutoff of 0,15 IU/mL (Fig. 1a) . In other words the positivity rate based on at least one pool being positive per specimen changed from 44 % to 50 % positivity. We wish to apologize for this error based on wrongly picking OD values instead of IU/mL data during the process of writing the manuscript after an initial IU/mL-based analysis. However, this obviously does not change the key message of the paper, the rather low rate of Interferon-ɣ release in half of the probands when using this novel IGRA assay in a cohort of healthy health care workers vaccinated twice with Moderna mRNA-1273Controversies about the clinical interpretation of Quantiferon assay results for other pathogens have been published; for example Valle-Arroyo et al. (Valle-Arroyo and Aguado, 2020) reported a lack of QuantiFERON-CMV response in CMV-seropositive healthy individuals which is reminiscent of our finding for SARS-CoV-2 vaccinees presenting with positive serology and negative IGRA results. We propose that in order to improve the positivity rate of the novel kit, perhaps the peptide-pool of the kit might need to be improved. Supporting this hypothesis, Qiagen already offers an "extended" SARS-CoV-2 peptide pool ("antigen pool 3", Cat No 626215) for their SARS-CoV-2 QuantiFERON assay (this extended peptide pool -which might lead to higher positivity rates-was not available for our study). An additional way to obtain higher positivity rates might be to measure TNF-α release instead of INF-ɣ release because after mRNA-1273 vaccination INF-ɣ responses were rather low whereas TNF-α responses were high as reported by Moderna (Anderson and Rouphael, 2020) .More studies of independent academic labs using different and larger cohorts are needed to evaluate this promising and convenient new kit aimed at determining cellular immunity against SARS-CoV-2.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for profit sector. Fig. 1. a) Comparison of Interferon-gamma release in vaccinees (IU/mL). Y-axis in IU/mL. The arrow indicates a cutoff of 0,15 IU/mL. We found large differences between our 18 vaccinees. Considering antigen pool 1 (Ag1) and a cutoff of 0,15 IU/mL (indicated by arrow) 8 of 18 samples would be regarded as positive (vaccinees 2, 3, 4, 10, 13, 14, 16 and 18) . When regarding antigen pool 2 (Ag2) and a cutoff of 0,15 IU/mL (indicated by arrow), 9 of 18 of our vaccinees would be regarded as positive (vaccinees 2, 3, 4, 7, 10, 13, 14, 16, 18) . Thus, many vaccinees showed rather low responses. b) Comparison of Interferon-gamma release in vaccinees (OD). Y-axis in OD. Also in this analysis we found large differences between our 18 vaccinees. Considering antigen pool 1 (Ag1) or antigen pool 2 (Ag2) and a cutoff of 0,15 (indicated by arrow) 8 of 18 samples would be regarded as positive (vaccinees 2, 3, 4, 10, 13, 14, 16 and 18) . Thus, many vaccinees showed rather low responses.

