Introduction

Older age and presence of comorbidities including immunosuppression are recognized to increase the severity of COVID-19 [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] . However, existing evidence for an association between HIV infection and COVID-19 related outcomes is mixed. Despite effective antiretroviral therapy (ART), people with HIV (PWH) may continue to experience persistent immunodysfunction [6, 7] which might promote COVID-19 severity, or conversely, attenuate its pathological immune responses [8] . Although some antiretroviral drugs have been proposed to protect against COVID-19, the data remain uncertain [9, 10] . Importantly, the common occurrence of co-factors such as diabetes and chronic renal and pulmonary disease [11] , alongside disadvantageous socioeconomic variables [12] , may increase the risk of adverse outcomes among PWH who acquire SARS-CoV-2.Several case series and observational cohort studies have described the outcomes of in PWH across Europe [9, [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] , Asia [18, 19] , and the United States [8, [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] . These studies have often been limited by small sample sizes, lack of direct comparative data from people without HIV, or inability to adjust for comorbidities. Some reports indicated that PWH did not experience higher rates of COVID-19 related hospitalization or mortality than people without HIV [14, 21] , whereas others suggested increased disease severity [9, 20] . Importantly, preliminary data from South Africa indicated that despite effective ART, HIV infection more than doubled the risk of COVID-19 related mortality [23] .To characterize the presenting characteristics and outcomes of COVID-19 related hospitalization in PWH relative to those without HIV in the United Kingdom (UK), we analyzed data collected 

Setting and participants

The ISARIC WHO CCP-UK is an ongoing prospective cohort study in hospitals in England, Scotland, and Wales [24] . The study was activated on 17 th January 2020. The protocol, case report form (CRF) and other study materials, and details of the Independent Data and Material Access Committee are available online *24+. Eligible patients were people aged ≥18 years who were admitted to participating hospitals (207 at the time of analysis) with either laboratoryconfirmed or highly likely (based on clinical, laboratory and radiological findings) SARS CoV-2 infection. PCR-based virus detection was the only test available during the study and the decision to test was at the discretion of the attending clinical team, who also decided upon hospital admission, transfer into critical care and use of ventilation.

Data collection

Baseline was defined as the date of hospital admission or symptom onset (for those with symptom onset after hospitalization, see below). We included individuals with a baseline date that was on or before 4 th June 2020 for whom 14 days had elapsed at data extraction on 18 th June. Individuals with missing admission date were excluded. Where the date of symptom onset was missing, we assumed that symptoms began on the date of the first SARS-CoV-2 PCR test.A c c e p t e d M a n u s c r i p t 7 Based on the date of symptom onset relative to the date of admission, the infection was classed as community-acquired (symptom onset <3 days), indeterminate (3-7 days), probable hospitalacquired (8-14 days) and definite hospital-acquired (>14 days). Using the CRF version 9.2 [24], demographics, comorbidities and concomitant medications were recorded on admission; measures of disease severity and laboratory test results were recorded on day 1 (baseline), day 3, day 6, day 9and on the day of admission to critical care if applicable. CRF-reported HIV-positive status was confirmed via recorded ART, Pneumocystis jirovecii prophylaxis in the absence of non-HIV indications (n=2), or directly with a site investigator. Individuals with missing HIV status and those with unconfirmed HIV-positive status were excluded.

Statistical analysis

Presenting characteristics were compared between HIV-positive and HIV-negative people and between PWH who died and those who survived at 28 days using Wilcoxon rank sum tests (for continuous variables) and Pearson's chi-squared or Fisher's exact test (for categorical variables).For all individuals, follow-up ended on the date of death. Patients discharged for home palliative care were considered to have died three days afterwards. Follow-up was right-censored at day 28 for those remaining alive as an inpatient, or for those who were discharged (excepting palliative discharge) prior to day 28. No deaths were recorded among PWH after day 28. Followup was censored for patients transferred to another facility at date of transfer; among those with unknown outcome, it was censored on the last recorded date of follow-up where they were known to be alive. For patients who died, were transferred or discharged on the date of admission or who had no further follow-up recorded beyond the first day, we recorded 0.5 days of follow-up. The primary analysis used a Kaplan-Meier approach to display the cumulative M a n u s c r i p t 8 mortality over this period and in strata defined by sex and age. Cox proportional hazards regression with the Efron method for ties was then used to describe the association of mortality with HIV status, before and after adjustment for the following potential confounders: sex, ethnicity, age (in quadratic form), indeterminate/probable hospital acquisition of COVID-19 (as defined above), and ten separate comorbidities at admission (a series of binary variables to indicate the presence or absence of each of chronic cardiac disease, chronic pulmonary disease, chronic renal disease, diabetes, obesity, chronic neurological disorder, dementia, liver disease [mild, moderate or severe], malignancy, and chronic hematological disease). These variables were selected a priori. We also included adjustment for the baseline date to account for changes in mortality over time. For partially missing comorbidity data, we assumed missing comorbidities were absent. Participants with completely missing comorbidity data were excluded from these adjusted analyses. We fitted a further model adjusting for disease severity a at presentation, defined as oxygen saturation <94% on air or receiving oxygen therapy, in order to assess whether risk of mortality in PWH could be explained by a different stage of disease advancement at hospitalization. Finally, we repeated the same analysis among individuals aged 70 year. A series of sensitivity analyses were performed: i) we repeated the analyses after censoring follow-up on the day of discharge; ii) we included those with definite hospital-acquired COVID-19; iii) we used symptom onset date as the baseline date for all; iv) we excluded PWH lacking a record of ART; v) we excluded those without a recorded positive SARS-CoV-2 PCR result; vi) we calculated propensity scores for HIV-positive status using a logistic regression model based on sex, ethnicity, age (in quadratic form), indeterminate/probable hospital acquisition of COVID-19, smoking status, baseline date, and ten comorbidities, and included the propensity score in a univariate Cox regression model for death at 28 days; vii) we considered a binary endpoint of 14-day mortality and performed logistic regression (with the A c c e p t e d M a n u s c r i p t 9 same confounder adjustment as described above); and viii) we used a competing risks regression model with discharge as a competing risk for mortality. In PWH, we used a Cox proportional hazard model to investigate associations with day-28 mortality. Analyses were conducted in Stata v16.1 (Statacorp, TX, USA).

Ethical considerations

Approval was granted by the following Ethics Committees: South Central-Oxford (Ref 

Participants

ISARIC CCP-UK recorded 53,993 people with COVID-19 between 17 th January and 18 th June 2020.After excluding non-eligible participants (Figure 1) , we included 47,592 patients, of whom 122 (0.26%) had confirmed HIV infection. A positive SARS-CoV-2 RNA PCR test was recorded for 43,062/47,592 (90.5%) individuals. Patients excluded from the analysis did not differ by sex, ethnicity or age; in particular, the characteristics of those excluded due to missing HIV status closely resembled those reported to be HIV-negative (Supplementary Table 1 ). Among PWH, one person was diagnosed with HIV during the admission and 112 (91.8%) had an ART record.The regional distribution of study participants was similar to the UK population of PWH receiving care (Supplementary Table 2 

).

A c c e p t e d M a n u s c r i p t 10 Characteristics at presentation PWH were younger than HIV-negative people (median 56 vs. 74 years, p<0.001) (Table 1, Figure   2 ) and comprised a greater proportion of males and people of black ethnicity. PWH had fewer comorbidities overall, and a lower prevalence of cardiac, pulmonary and rheumatological disease, dementia, and malignancy, but higher rates of moderate/severe liver disease;proportions with chronic renal disease, diabetes and hematological disease were similar. The duration of symptoms was longer in PWH (median 5 vs. 3 days, p=0.002) ( Table 2 ). PWH were more likely to present with fever, headache, myalgia and tachycardia, and to have cough and chest pain. Respiratory rate, occurrence of tachypnoea and hypoxia, and radiological evidence of chest infiltrates did not differ significantly between the two groups. PWH presented with lower total white blood cell and platelet count, but higher lymphocyte count and C-reactive protein (CRP) ( Table 3) .

COVID-19 outcomes

After adjustment for sex, ethnicity, age, baseline date, indeterminate/probable hospital acquisition of COVID-19, and ten comorbidities, the odds of admission to critical care were similar regardless of HIV status (odds ratio 1. 22 In the unadjusted analysis (Table 4) , the cumulative hazard of day-28 mortality was lower in PWH (HR 0.77, 95% CI 0.54-1.11; p=0.17). Results did not change after adjusting for sex or ethnicity. In contrast, adjustment for age resulted in a change in the direction of the association (adjusted HR 1.47, 95% CI 1.01-2.14; p=0.05). Results were similar after adjustment for sex, ethnicity, age, baseline date, indeterminate/probable hospital acquisition of COVID-19 and ten comorbidities and following additional adjustment for disease severity at presentation. When restricted to people <60 years, the analysis yielded an adjusted HR of 2.87 (95% CI 1.70-4.86;p<0.001). Sensitivity analyses showed consistent results (Supplementary Table 5 ). In particular, censoring follow-up on the day of discharge, including definite hospital-acquired COVID-19, using symptom onset as baseline and excluding PWH lacking an ART record did not significantly alter the model. A separate logistic regression model with a binary variable of day-14 mortality and a competing risk regression model with discharge as a competing risk for mortality also showed increased odds of mortality in the HIV-positive group.Among PWH, relative to patients who survived by day 28, patients who died were older and had a higher prevalence of diabetes and obesity and were less likely to have a record of ART (Table 5 and Supplementary Tables 6 and 7) .A c c e p t e d M a n u s c r i p t 12

Principal findings

This study found evidence suggesting an age-adjusted 47% increased risk of day-28 mortality among PWH hospitalized with COVID-19 compared to HIV-negative individuals in the same dataset. Among people aged <60 years, HIV-positive status more than doubled the risk of mortality after adjusting for sex, ethnicity, age, baseline date, ten separate comorbidities, and disease severity at presentation (as indicated by a record of hypoxia or receiving oxygen therapy). The latter adjustment considered that doctors may be more likely to admit HIVpositive adults with COVID-19 despite less severe symptoms.The influence of age, sex and ethnicity on COVID-19 outcomes is currently debated [1, 2, 25] .PWH in our study were significantly younger than the HIV-negative group and adjusting for age changed the direction of the association between HIV status and day-28 mortality, indicating that age was a significant confounder in our analyses. Men were more prevalent in the HIVpositive group, which is consistent with the epidemiology of HIV infection in the UK, where men represent just over two thirds of the whole population with HIV [26] . People of black ethnicity comprised 42% of the HIV-positive group in this analysis relative to ~26% among PWH in the UK population [26] . Adjustment for sex or ethnicity alone did not impact our relative hazard estimates.Whilst there is a recognized interplay between HIV and comorbidities, neither omitting the adjustment for comorbidities nor adjusting for separate comorbidities modified the association.A c c e p t e d M a n u s c r i p t 13 PWH had fewer comorbidities, notably lower prevalence of chronic pulmonary disease and malignancies, and this is largely a function of their younger age. HIV-positive people who died were older and were more likely to suffer from obesity and diabetes with complications than those who survived to discharge. Similar trends have been seen in the general population [1, 25] .While these observations highlight the importance of obesity and diabetes as cofactors, the increased risk of COVID-19 related mortality in PWH was not merely due to the presence of promoting comorbidities. It should be highlighted that we did not take into consideration differences in the control of comorbidities between the two groups.

Comparison with other studies

Evidence about the interplay between HIV and COVID-19 is not entirely consistent [8, 9, [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] . A case-control study from New York compared 88 PWH, all of whom were receiving ART, and 405HIV-negative controls matched by age, gender, ethnicity, and calendar week of infection [21] .The study found no difference in the outcomes of COVID-19 related hospitalization after adjusting for demographics, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, smoking, and baseline ferritin and white blood cell count. There are important differences in the two study populations. Participants in the New York study had a median age of 61 years (IQR 54-67), whereas we found excess mortality in HIV-positive people aged <60 years. Whereas malignancies were recorded less commonly in our cohort (3% vs. 10%), prevalence of obesity was higher (17% vs. 11%). It is also noteworthy that mortality in the overall ISARIC CCP-UK population was higher than that reported in the New York study [21] and other countries [1] .Consistent with our findings, there are preliminary data that HIV-positive status was associated with increased hazard of mortality (adjusted HR 2.75) in South Africa [23] . Although the analysis A c c e p t e d M a n u s c r i p t 14 did not account for history of tuberculosis, obesity and socioeconomic status, it is noteworthy that HIV suppression on ART did not alter the mortality risk.

Strengths and limitations of this study

A key strength of this study was the ability to perform a direct comparison of people with and without HIV in the same dataset, and to account for age, gender, ethnicity and key comorbidities.The data for this study were collected during the first peak of the UK COVID-19 epidemic and there are missing data, including 2,742 patients with missing HIV status, who were excluded from the analysis. We also excluded 10 people initially recorded as having HIV but whose HIV status could not be confirmed; this group was similar to the HIV-negative group, with a median age of 81, suggesting that their initial HIV record was incorrect. Thus, these missing data are unlikely to affect the results.Our focus was on the effect of HIV-positive status on day-28 mortality among people hospitalized with COVID-19. We did not address risk factors for a COVID-19 diagnosis or hospitalization among PWH, or the suggested modulating role of certain antiretroviral agents [9, 10] . We also lacked data to adjust for deprivation or socioeconomic status. Our analysis cannot provide evidence of the role of HIV-related parameters on outcomes of COVID-19 related hospitalization, as we did not have details of the ART history, plasma HIV-1 RNA load, CD4 cell count, and history of HIV-related disease. HIV-positive people who died were less likely to have ART recorded than those who survived at day 28. This raises the possibility that some of A c c e p t e d M a n u s c r i p t 15 the patients who died were not receiving ART, although this cannot be stated with certainty. In the UK, 93% of the 103,000 people estimated to have HIV infection have been diagnosed; of these, 97% receive ART with excellent virological suppression and only a small subset (~3%) is either not engaged with care or experiences problems with virological control despite ART [26] .Only a few PWH in our cohort had Pneumocystis jirovecii prophylaxis recorded in their admission medications, suggesting that the likelihood of PWH in our study being severely immunosuppressed was overall low.Despite effective ART and normalized CD4 cell counts, a subset of PWH continue to experience immune activation, inflammation and a pro-coagulatory state [7] which may modulate the risk of COVID-19 related morbidity and mortality [28, 29] . Persistent immune dysfunction may be the consequence of advanced immunocompromise prior to the start of ART, as defined by a low nadir CD4 cell count and inverted CD4:CD8 ratio. In the UK, 43% of people newly diagnosed with HIV in 2018 had a CD4 count <350 cells/mm 3 , a threshold indicative of significant immunosuppression [26, 30] . Furthermore, current guidelines about starting ART at the time to diagnosis were implemented relatively recently, whereas in the past ART initiation in the UK was deferred until the CD4 count had declined below thresholds of initially 200, then 350 and subsequently 500 cells/mm 3 [6, 30] . Thus, many older PWH in the UK (and worldwide) will have experienced years of uncontrolled HIV replication prior to commencing treatment and may also have received earlier regimens of suboptimal efficacy, with potentially lasting effects on immune function [30, 31] . Immunological studies will be required to confirm these hypotheses. 

Role of funder/sponsor

The funders had no role in the design and conduct of the study; collection, management, analysis, and interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit the manuscript for publication. Professor Geretti (the manuscript's guarantor) affirms that the manuscript is an honest, accurate, and transparent account of the study being reported; that no important aspects of the study have been omitted; and that any discrepancies from the study as planned (and, if relevant, registered) have been explained. A c c e p t e d M a n u s c r i p t 30 

