

Bailey: It's about being able to have my own one.... And, obviously being involved in when everyone goes out for ciggy breaks or e-cigarette breaks on a night out. Go out with them (laughs). Provide for myself, sort of thing.

Theme: Recognition and social cachet

Sub-themes Device appearance and extended-selfIain: I heard about it from a friend and it was one of my mates overseas and it's in Australia and he picked it up and he said you know, it's actually not that bad, it's a bit of fun and yeah, I sort of looked into it and then I think as things started to get a little bit more popular and it became a little bit more socially accepted to have Ecigarettes and all that and they stopped looking so ugly and old fashioned, I was kind of like I might give it a go... Jane: .. so we went to this like sort of shisha shop that also sold vapes. And then I thought, "Oh, well, I might just buy a little one for myself," and 'cause, you know, I, I thought it would be a cool thing to have. (laughing)Performance props and social cachet Abe: when my friends come down I guess I'll pull it out as a novelty again.Joseph: I just thought that it was, that it looked kinda cool, you know, being able to blow smoke out and um, you know, it tastes good. So, I was just like you know, I might try it. Asked him how much it cost and he said $700 for a good third generation one. So, I went out and spent a bit of money on it.William: I go out with my friends maybe three, three times a week maybe, um, or over at their flat that's, I take it out. 'Cause they're always quite interested, like they s-I still get a lot of crap for it 'cause it's, 'cause it's vaping. And once they see the tricks they're a lot more into it, and they-they wanna try it. "Yeah, it helped me like significantly." He's lost a lot of kgs, from one of my friends who doesn't use nicotine um in his, and he told me he had lost some kgs and he was just like it just helps him with eating snacks and stuff, and moving forward from like just eating food constantly. Like, when you're want to binge eat, or you eat something and then you're still kind of hungry, and you're like, "Oh, I'll go grab something more." Then it helped him a lot with it. Theme: Rationalisations relative to smoking Sub-themes Reduced harmsLeonie: for quite a while, I was having the urge to smoke, and, um, I sort of dealt with that whenever my mental health gets bad. Uh, it's sort of like, my brain wants a coping mechanism, any coping mechanism, you know, and, um, people ... It-it looks as if cigarette smoking might be a helpful one, or something, to my brain. Um, I'm aware of all the risks and all the damages, but I just kept having this like sort of obsessiveness or urge or whatever, like, I want to smoke a cigarette. I feel like that'll make me feel better. Um, so she, uh, was trying to like look out for me, and we-we talked about it a lot, and we did a lot of research, and I decided that, um, the harms were a lot less, and I could start with non-nicotine juice, and that it would give me that sort of act of smoking without any of the nicotine, or any of the, um, the tobacco, uh, toxins or anything like that. So that was, I think, that was mostly what motivated me, is I didn't want to start smoking, even though I wanted to, but I didn't want to, you know?Libby: I would 100% say vaping is a lot better, or not better for you, but not as bad for you [as smoking] kind of thing.Abe: it seems like they're really pushing for everyone to finish smoking and start smoking e-cigarettes because there's so much more health benefits. Or I wouldn't say benefits, but there's less ... detrimental effects that smoking has.Ashley: I think lack of combustion and so less of the, so no carbon monoxide, um, like less of all the other by products.Ashley: I guess because (clears throat) I did read up a bit and, um, although they're not completely sure, because of how new it is, in general it did seem less harmful than smoking.Dave: there's so many like negative ads about tobacco and smoking. And vaping's seen as like a positive sort of alternative.Gerry: Like I said before, I would think that vaping would be better, in terms of health effects compared to

