RPS 116-3

Influence of the minimum b-value on prostate cancer assessment using conventional DWI and DKI models 

RPS 116-12

Radiomic analysis in renal cell carcinoma: the impact of computed tomography vascular phase on parameter quantification 

RPS 102-2

Acoustic radiation force impulse elastography as an alternative to diffusion-weighted imaging for the characterisation of breast lesions Aichi/JP, 2 Nagakute/JP (snakano1@aichi-med-u.ac.jp) 

RPS 102-11

Reduction of pressure sensor artifacts in the simultaneous acquisition of wide-angle breast tomosynthesis and mechanical imaging 

RPS 105-10

Classification of lung opacities in supine chest radiographs: artificial intelligence approach (external algorithm evaluation) versus a radiological assessment 

RPS 214-5

The eye-tracking system as an assessment tool for mammography positioning 

MyT3 2-16

In-vivo measurements of ADC of invasive ductal breast cancer: a multicentric study to assess the quality of DWI protocols in breast MRI at 1.5T 

MyT3 2-20

Comparison of prone digital breast tomosynthesis-guided vacuumassisted biopsy (DBT-guided VAB) and prone atereotactic-guided vacuum-assisted biopsy (S-guided VAB) 

RPS 203

Myocardial perfusion imaging and infarct characterisation: diagnosis and prognosis RPS 203-1 Improved sensitivity in diagnosing myocardial infarction using frequency selective nonlinear blending in computed tomography ; Tübingen/ DE (eva.stock@med.uni-tuebingen.de) Purpose: 

RPS 203-11

Sequential strategy including FFRCT plus stress-CTP impacts on the management of patients with stable chest pain: the stress-CTP RIPCORD study 

RPS 212-4

Left atrial dysfunction in children and adolescents with severe obesity: a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging myocardial strain study 

RPS 311-4

High signal intensity in the globus pallidus (GP) and dentate nucleus (DN) on unenhanced T1-weighted magnetic resonance images: an assessment of two macrocyclic gadolinium-based agents 

RPS 311-5

The absence of T1 hyperintensity in the brain of high-risk iron-loaded thalassemia patients after multiple administrations of high-dose gadobutrol 

RPS 311-6

No changes in T1 relaxometry after a mean of eleven administrations of gadobutrol 

RPS 311-9

Impact of the novel contrast agent gadopiclenol on decision making in patients with brain metastases 

RPS 311-10

The value of 4D-MR angiography at 3T compared to DSA for the follow-up of treated dural arteriovenous fistulas 

RPS 307-6

Comparison of first-order radiomic parameters to the mean ADC for the prediction of clinically significant cancer from prostate MRI 

RPS 307-12

Multi-parametric magnetic resonance imaging of prostate cancer: correlation between Ktrans, a Gleason score, and a PI-RADS score 

RPS 303-3

Correcting versus resolving respiratory motion in free-breathing wholeheart MRA: a comparison in patients with thoracic aortic disease 

RPS 303-7

Value of T2 mapping in patients with chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH) before and after balloon pulmonary angioplasty (BPA) 

RPS 303-12

A prospective randomised non-inferiority study of low iodine dual-energy coronary CT-angiography CTiR 3-9Dose reference levels during fluoroscopically-guided procedures performed using mobile X-ray systems in operating rooms 

RPS 312-9

The neurodevelopmental effect of intracranial haemorrhage observed in hypoxic-ischaemic brain injury in hypothermia-treated asphyxiated neonates: an MRI study 

RPS 312-10

Quantitative paediatric MRI going clinical: comprehensive brain assessment from a single sequence based on quantitative brain maturation atlases 

RPS 301b

The role of imaging in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) management 

Scientific Programme

MyT3 4-4Evaluation of different keV-settings in dual-energy CT angiography of the siphon of internal carotid artery using noise-optimised virtual monoenergetic imaging ; Shanghai/ CN (kdidjs_fu@163.com) Purpose:Author Disclosures:Purpose: It was intended to compare interventional super-selective embolisation regarding renal parameters, clinical course and outcome to other therapeutical options and by that improving the approach to the treatment of acute renal bleedings of arterial origin. Methods and materials: Patients with renal injuries due to bleeding of arterial origin, pseudoaneurysms or arteriovenous fistulas underwent transcatheter arterial embolisation. The analysis included data of the technical and clinical success of embolotherapy, differences performing endovascular treatment during the clinical course and whether the post-interventional modified parenchymal renal volume amplifies the risk of developing renovascular hypertonia and chronic kidney disease. Results: A total of 167 patients was included. The technical success rate was 100 % and a clinical success rate of 92.5 % was achieved. Recurrent bleeding occurred in 14 patients (8.4 %). 6 (42.9 %) were re-embolised and 5 (35.7 %) underwent total nephrectomy. Recurrent bleedings tended to occur in correlation with subcapsular haematomas (p < 0.001). Renal function was measured by glomerular filtration rate and creatinine several times. It revealed no significant changes (p > 0.05). Patients with discontinuity of renal fascia were at a higher risk of parenchymal loss (p = 0.0237). The post-interventional renal volume loss was insignificantly low and over a period of 15 years, neither contributed to the progression of renovascular hypertonia nor to deterioration of renal parameters. Purpose: To evaluate the role of colour Doppler sonography in the evaluation of pregnancy with intrauterine growth restriction. The uteroplacental circulation, which are the two maternal uterine arteries. The foeto-placental circulation, which is the umbilical artery. The foetal circulation, which includes the foetal middle cerebral artery.Results: Subjective image quality was evaluated with mean scores of 4.16 (range 3-5; std.deviat.+-0.73), significantly higher for DA compared to the mean scores of 3.43 (range 2-5; std.deviat.+-1.80) for standard DSA. Evaluators agreed CDAs provided more information than the simple BW angiograms (87%), the image would be useful to select the dominant feeding artery (93%), and the functional stenoses of the branches could also be determined (84%). The interrater agreement, Fleiss' kappa, and significance were 81%, 0.19, p<0.05, 85%, 0.32, p<0.01, and 79%, 0.11, p<0.05, respectively. Conclusion: Parametric delay images calculated from x-ray angiography series provide more information than standard angiograms and hold additional information about the branches of the internal iliac artery. Decision-making based solely on CDAs will require an appropriate prospective safety assessment.Limitations: Colour-coded-parametric-angiography has to be tested in upcoming prospective trials to prove our results for real-time image guidance. Ethics committee approval: University hospital ethics committee approval obtained. Purpose: To evaluate fibroid size using ultrasonography (US) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) after uterine artery embolisation (UAE) of leiomyoma. Methods and materials: 1,023 women with symptomatic leiomyoma were treated by bilateral transcatheter UAE. Angiography and embolisation were performed using 5F Cobra and Roberts uterine catheters by 355-1,000µm of PVA particles. The size of particles depended on the uterine artery diameter and anastomosis between the uterine and ovary arteries. The mean age was 29.5 years (range: 19-47).Methods and materials: In this retrospective analysis from 2010 to date, 17 patients (12 men and 5 women, mean age: 59.8 years) presenting with adrenal bleedings were treated by endovascular embolisation. The aetiology was traumatic in 7 cases, ruptured neoplasm in 8 cases, and spontaneous in 2 patients assuming oral anticoagulant therapy. After thin slice contrast-enhanced CT, a super-selective embolisation was conducted with different embolising agents according to the type of vessel lesion and operator preference. Results: Technical success rate, considered as an interruption of adrenal bleeding detectable at angiography, was 94.1%. Clinical success rate, considered as haemodynamic stability restoration within 24 hours from the procedure, was 82.3%. The vessels involved were the superior adrenal artery in 5 patients, the middle adrenal artery in 8 patients, the inferior adrenal artery in one patient, and more than one adrenal artery in 3 patients. No procedure-related major complications occurred and no patients had infarctions, necrosis, abscess formation, or required long-term steroid supplementation. Conclusion: Acute adrenal haemorrhages can be safely and effectively managed by catheter-directed embolisations. The source of bleeding has to be carefully investigated at CT and angiography as adrenal glands present with a wide and complex vascular arterial network.Limitations: This is a retrospective analysis and therefore bias selections should be considered. The number of patients is small, however, this is due to the low frequency of the scenario. Ethics committee approval: n/ Conclusion: Single-beat CCTA using wide-detector CT could achieve high rate of success and good IQ for AF patients and with acceptable ED compared with SR patients. Limitations: A systematic comparison of diagnostic accuracy between CCTA and the gold standard of invasive coronary angiography has not been performed. Ethics committee approval: We performed this study with the approval of the local institutional review board. Funding: No funding was received for this work.Author Disclosures: C. Zhao: nothing to disclose Z. Yang: nothing to disclose Purpose: Coronary artery calcinosis is a specific biomarker of coronary atherosclerosis. It is often detected on chest CT scans. Today the popularity of lung cancer screening with low-dose CT is growing. The aim of the study is to compare the diagnostic value of low-dose chest CT for the assessment of calcium score in comparison with the standard gated calcium scoring. Methods and materials: Non-gated low-dose chest CT and gated calcium scoring were performed in 251 asymptomatic patients. The Agatston calcium score values obtained from low-dose CT and gated scans were analysed independently by two radiologists. Inter-observer and inter-technique agreement were evaluated (data with "zero" calcium scores was excluded). Inter-technique differences in a stratification of patients into five risk categories (scores 0, 1-100, 101-400, 401-1000 and> 1000) using the kappa coefficient (k) were analysed.PCS of viable myocardium group increased significantly compared with that detected after reperfusion (P<0.05). Significant variances were presented between viable and nonviable myocardial group during stress. In addition, there was a significant difference between two-dimensional strain measured from cine-MR at rest and with stress. Strain variance of nonviable myocardium group during dobutamine stress dose not observe compared that detected after reperfusion (P>0.05).was also no significant difference in the eye segment mean diameters between patients with and without aura using the Mann-Whitney U-test (p > 0.05).with myocarditis was observed. Also, a positive correlation between increased native T1 mapping values and decreased values of peak circumferential strain (p=0.01), peak short-axis radial strain (p = 0.009), and peak long axis radial strain (p=0.02) was observed for the medium slice in these patients.

Methods and materials:

Results: Results:We recruited 20 healthy subjects (13 males, 7 female; age 25-80). Each patient on the same day performed the Italian version of the trait scale of the state-trait anxiety inventory (STAI-I) for the assessment of a situation independent general condition of anxiety and then underwent an MR examination on a 3T scanner (Vantage Titan 3T -Canon) with a 32 channel head coil. The MR protocol included a 12 direction DW sequence for the connectometry analysis. The connectometry analysis was performed using a linear regression model to consider the effects of the STAI-I score, choosing three different T-score thresholds (T-threshold) values (1, 2, and 3). Results were considered statistically valid for p-value adjusted for a false discovery rate (p-FDR)<0.05. The network topology analysis measured the influence of the STAI-I score on brain networks.The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR) were calculated on one phantom and two healthy volunteers. Assessment of absolute and relative contrast between grey and white matter, and qualitative evaluation of both normal encephalic structures and pathological findings representation, was conducted in 10 patients with different diseases, part of a protocol including 250 patients. Results: SNR and CNR were comparable between MRF and conventional imaging (p>0.05 for all comparisons, except higher SNR of conventional FLAIR sequences in white matter, p=0.016). In MRF, absolute contrast was higher in T1-weighted (p=0.01) but lower in T2-weighted and FLAIR images. Relative contrast was higher in T1-weighted (p=0.0003) and comparable in T2-weighted and FLAIR images. Although not superior to conventional imaging in anatomical detail, MRF alone provided sequences with high diagnostic confidence in 7/10 patients, while the others needed further MR scans to reach conclusive diagnoses. Conclusion: MRF is a promising tool for MRI in that it may preserve a good diagnostic accuracy while reducing the detriment of a long scan time.Limitations: The small sample size. Purpose: To evaluate the role of multi b-value synthetic diffusion-weighted imaging in the evaluation of stroke. Methods and materials: 52 patients who presented with symptoms suggestive of stroke with ages of 39-81 years (mean age 49.5+/-10 years; M: F ratio 2:3) were evaluated by a dedicated stroke protocol and supplemented by an additional 2-minute synthetic magic DWI multi b-value protocol after a waiver from IRB. The parameters of synthetic DWI sequence are as follows: multi b-value DWI acquisition with b-values of 0-1,000 and synthesis of b-values of 1,500 and 2,000, with the maximum b-value not exceeding 2,500. The sensitivity of the detection of infarcts on conventional DWI was compared to MAGIC DWI. Results: Of 52 patients, 31 had multiple acute lacunar infarcts in the MCA territory and MCA and PCA watershed zones, 21 in the infratentorial region including the brain stem and cerebellum, and 6 with a sensitivity of 92% and specificity of 97% with conventional DWI. Using the MAGIC DWI with the synthesis of multiple b-values between 1,000 to 2,500, the sensitivity and specificity significantly improved to 97% and 99%, with an NPV of 99%. Conclusion: Multi B-value ultra-fast synthetic MAGIC DWI, which is a synthetic diffusion technique, is a powerful adjunct tool to the conventional stroke protocol offering the user a retrospective synthetic slider to generate multi b-value data from 100-2,500, increasing the sensitivity of stroke detection with no time or SNR penalties. Purpose: Quantitative assessment of myelination is an important clinical biomarker in treatment and follow-up. Myelin can be measured using synthetic MRI; the measurement of the R1 and R2 relaxation and proton density PD, in conjunction with a myelin model, can provide myelin partial volume maps for the entire brain. Recently, a 3D acquisition method was developed for highresolution, isotropic synthetic MRI. The purpose of this work was to compare myelin detection using 2D and 3D. Methods and materials: The 3D QALAS sequence is a segmented spoiled gradient-echo sequence with 5 parallel acquisitions, interleaved with a T2 preparation and inversion pulse. The 2D MDME sequence (MAGiC) is a saturation recovery multi-slice TSE sequence with multi-echo read-out. A group of 12 volunteers was acquired two times with 3D QALAS and two times with MDME, both at 1.5T and 3T. Results: The mean myelin volume for the entire group was 183 mL and the mean brain volume was 1,300 mL (14.1%). A high correlation was found between volumes determined by QALAS and MDME. The Pearson correlation coefficient was 0.94 and the mean difference was 0±13 mL. The difference between measurement 1 and 2 was -2±10 mL at 1.5T and 1±13 mL at 3T for QALAS, whereas it was 0±4 mL at 1.5T and -3±4 mL at 3T for MDME. Conclusion: Myelin measurements using 3D QALAS provides very similar values of myelin and brain volumes in comparison to 2D MDME. The advantage of 3D QALAS is the ability to view the data in all orientations.A retrospective, observational, single-centre study including 15 newborns (8 females) was conducted. Preterm patients were equally divided into GA groups according to the WHO sub-categories: extremely (GA< 28 weeks, EP), very (28-31 weeks and 6 days, VP), and moderate to late preterm (32-37 weeks, MLP). All patients underwent transcranial ultrasound (US) using a Toshiba Aplio500 scanner (Canon Medical Systems Corporation) and a linear 14 MHz transducer. Exams were performed during the first day of life via the anterior fontanel including superficial and deep scans (each on coronal and parasagittal planes). Based on their SMI morphology and location, microvessels were classified as extrastriatal (subdivided into cortical and medullary), striatal, or thalamic. Two examiners independently classified the vessels as visible (echogenic linear structures) or invisible. To assess the association between vessel visibility and GA, a binomial logistic regression analysis (separate for each microvessel group) was performed, taking visibility as a dependent variable and both examiners and GA as predictor variables. Results: A statistically significant difference among GA groups was found in sex (p=0.030), GA by definition (p=0.002), weight at birth (p=0.007), and the Apgar score within 1 minute (p=0.024). GA significantly contributed to the visibility of superficial vessels (p<0.05 for both cortical and medullary ones) but not striatal and thalamic vessels. Conclusion: SMI-US is a feasible tool for visualising and assessing intraparenchymal brain microvasculature in pre-term neonates. The morphology and distribution of the brain microvessels seen in the current study are consistent with those described in previous anatomical and radiological research. Purpose: To assess the diagnostic accuracy of T1-and T2-weighted contrasts generated by the MR data post-processing software SyMRI for neonatal brain imaging.A total of 32 neonates were included in this retrospective study. 4 independent rating neuroradiologists assessed the neonatal brain on the basis of conventional and SyMRI generated T1-and T2weighted contrasts. The sensitivity and specificity of both methods were calculated and compared with each other. Results: Compared to conventionally acquired T1-and T2-weighted images, SyMRI-generated contrasts showed a lower sensitivity but a higher specificity Purpose: Metabolic derangements are known to occur after traumatic brain injury (TBI). Animal models point to initial Na + influx causing membrane depolarisation. White matter, particularly the corpus callosum (CC), is susceptible to damage. The purpose of this study is to compare the distribution of the total sodium concentration (TSC) in the CC between patients of mild TBI (mTBI) and controls using sodium MRI. Methods and materials: 11 patients (6 M, 5 F; 20-52 years) with a history of mTBI and 10 healthy controls were studied. Sodium MRI scans were performed on a Siemens Prisma3T scanner using a custom 8-channel dual-tuned (1H-23Na) Tx/Rx head coil. Twisted projection imaging was used (FOV=220 mm, matrix size=64, TE/TR=0.3/100 ms, FA=90, and TA=10.3 min). Sodium MR images were visually inspected in conjunction with proton MPRAGE. TSC was measured in genu, body, and splenium with 5 mm regions of interest (ROI). To assess for reproducibility, 5 measurements were independently taken within each area. A comparison was made between cohorts with a significance level of 0.05. To assess the distribution of TSC along the CC in the anteriorposterior dimension, the TSC genu/splenium ratio was calculated. Results: TSC was higher in the genu (51.59 vs 45.6 mmol, p=0.049) and lower in the splenium (50.80 vs 41.88 mmol, p=0.01) in mTBI patients compared to controls. The genu/splenium ratio was also higher in patients (1.2 vs 0.9, p=0.001). On visual inspection, mTBI subjects demonstrated a reversal of the normal TSC anterior-posterior gradient in the CC compared with controls. Conclusion: TSC distribution in the CC is altered after mTBI. Since changes in extracellular Na + concentration are transient after brain injury, detected alterations in TSC are believed to be attributable to changes in the intracellular Na + concentration. Our work supports the notion of ongoing Na + channelopathy after injury affecting callosal white matter such as perturbed expression of sodium channels. Purpose: Magnetic resonance-guided focused ultrasound (MRgFUS) is a noninvasive treatment for essential tremor (ET) that allows targeted thermal ablation of brain tissue. Previous studies demonstrate targeting the thalamic ventral intermedius nucleus (Vim) as an effective treatment in ET. This paper describes the world's first trial using MRgFUS to target both the Vim and the inferior zona incerta (ZI). Methods and materials: This prospective study enrolled 13 patients with medication refractory ET for a unilateral MRgFUS procedure. Tremor severity and functional impairment were assessed at baseline and regular intervals posttreatment for 24 months, using the clinical rating scale for tremor (CRST). BFS spirals were also collated intraoperatively, immediately pre-procedure and after targeting the Vim and ZI. All spirals were scored by 3 blinded neurologists. The percentage improvement in the spiral scores after Vim and ZI ablation were compared and analysed. Results: In all patients, there was successful thermal ablation of the target tissue at both Vim and ZI with improvement in all parameters stable over 24 months. The CRST tremor score improved by 73.5% (treated arm) and 24% (non-treated arm Results: 8 3D-features discriminated lesions with a low or high mitotic-count (best AUC 0.81, best sensitivity 86%, and best specificity 93%). 6 3Dparameters detected GISTs based on the mutational group (best AUC 0.77, best sensitivity 75%, and best specificity 79%) and 3 parameters correlated with the risk class (best AUC 0.76, best sensitivity 72%, and best specificity 85%). In the differentiation between GIST at a lower or higher risk of recurrence, the regression model used 6 different features and obtained AUC 0.78, sensitivity 65%, specificity 79%, VPN 71%, and VPP 73% on the training set, and AUC 0.83, sensitivity 88%, and specificity 75% on the test set.The clinical data and CT data of 103 patients with solid pseudopapillary neoplasm confirmed by surgical resection and pathology were retrospectively analysed. According to the pathological results, all cases were divided into two groups (the invasive group and non-invasive group). Image analysis included tumour number, location, size, shape, calcification, haemorrhage, fibrous pseudo capsule, and the proportion of cystic or solid component. The density of the solid components in all lesions was measured in plain scan, the arterial phase, and venous phase of CT images. The differences between the two groups were statistically analysed. Results: All 103 cases of pSPN had a single lesion. 38 cases were in the invasive group and 65 cases were in the non-invasive group. There were statistically significant differences in the fibrous pseudo capsule and the proportion of cystic or solid component between the two groups (P<0.05). There were no significant differences in neoplasm maximum diameter, location, morphology, calcification, haemorrhage, pancreaticobiliary dilatation, and pancreatic atrophy between the two groups (P>0.05). The density in the venous phase (76.65±16.71) in the invasive group was higher than that in the noninvasive group (70.09±12.02) and the difference was statistically significant (P<0.05).The study included 30 antenatal women who were diagnosed as having a foetus with intrauterine growth restriction based on greyscale ultrasound findings and referred for obstetric Doppler ultrasound if the following inclusion criteria and exclusion criteria were met. The inclusion criteria were: singleton pregnancy with a gestational age of more than 28 weeks. Women with reliable dating of pregnancy confirmed by an early first-trimester ultrasound examination using CRL or BPD or with known LMP will be selected. Multiple pregnancies and foetuses with congenital anomalies. Doppler US evaluation was performed following a detailed clinical history and US biometry. The scanners and transducers used: the greyscale real-time ultrasonographic examinations were performed using ALOKA PROSOUND SSD -3500SX and PHILIPS HD 11XE. The transducers used for the study were 3.5MHz convex array transducer.We examined 36 patients (n = 100%) using dynamic perfusion computed tomography. 27 of them (n = 75%) diagnosed with transsexualism, underwent a female-to-male sex change operation using phalloplasty and consistent urethroplasty after 6 months. 9 (n = 25%) patients had different urogenital diseases such as: posttraumatic urethral stricture, microphallia etc. A free revascularised microsurgical allograft -skin-muscular thoracodorsal was used for the reconstruction of the penis, and for the reconstruction of the urethra was used skin-fascial radial allograft. Results: Processing of the data showed that in the early postoperative period there was a decrease in the level of arterial blood flow in the allograft tissue compared with preoperative indicators due to congestion and oedema. Then, an gradually increase in the level of arterial blood flow is observed due to the formation of anastomoses between the flap and the recipient's tissues and the further improvement of their function, as well as a decrease in the severity of oedema and congestion in the flap. The blood flow recovery in the flap to normal preoperative values was registered by the end of the first month after surgery. Purpose: To review bladder pathology with a multimodality approach and to define criteria when bladder pathology was found. Methods and materials: Review 300 cases with bladder pathology.The study was conducted on twenty (20) patients with the age ranging from 3-13 years old. Cases with a non-glomerular cause of acute kidney injury, obstructive uropathy and known reno-vascular lesion were excluded from the current study.In this prospective case-control study, 30 consenting patients having unilateral heel pain for >6 months and clinically diagnosed as unilateral heel pain were included. Patients were examined by the lead author and a faculty radiologist by B-mode sonography (for plantar fascia thickness), followed by SWE, obtaining a colour map for shear characteristics and quantitative data (shear velocity in cm/s and shear stress in kPa) using a 1x1 cm ROI placed at the position of the highest shear on the colour map. Sensitivity and false-positive rates with extrapolated specificity, PPV, and NPV were calculated, and shear stress cut-off values were obtained using the Chi-square test and ROC curve analysis. The unaffected foot from respective cases was taken as control (normal) for the study. Results: Of 30 examined cases, mean thickness of plantar fascia was significantly higher (5.4 mm) in the affected foot compared to the unaffected (2.9 mm), with a standard ROC cut-off of 3.7 mm (sensitivity 93%, false-positive rate 10%). The mean shear stress in the plantar fascia on the affected side (60.1kPa) differed significantly from the unaffected side (150.7kPa). Taking 97.5kPa as the shear stress cut-off, considering affected patients having values below this cutoff, sensitivity was 81.8% and the false-positive rate was 10.6%. Extrapolated specificity, PPV, and NPV were 89.4%, 88.5%, and 83.1%. AUC was 0.91. Conclusion: SWE shows superior diagnostic accuracy compared to grey-scale sonography in patients with plantar fasciitis and promises the potential for routine use in addition to B-mode US for the assessment of plantar fasciitis cases. Purpose: The increasing use of cone-beam CT to diagnose ankle and foot problems urges the development of quantitative 3D analysis tools that deliver geometrical parameters corresponding to well-known 2D counterparts. We compared estimates of geometrical parameters from both cone-beam CT and radiographs as differences can be expected between 2D and 3D analyses. Methods and materials: WB and non-WB cone-beam CT-images of the left and right hindfoot and forefoot were acquired on a Planmed verity cone-beam CTscanner. Geometric analyses were performed on images of the foot in 2D using simulated radiography images and 3D using custom analysis software. Measurements included the calcaneal pitch, Meary's angle, the angle between 1 st and 2 nd metatarsal (MTT), the talocalcaneal angle, and cuboid height. Results: 5 patients were included with a mean age of 39.6 years. All measurement results were statistically different in 2D and 3D (p<0.001). The average calcaneal pitch decreased in 2D and in both 3D WB compared to non-WB results. Meary's angle decreased in 2D measurements, however, increased using 3D measurements. The average angle between MTT1-2 increased in both approaches. During WB, the talocalcaneal angle decreased in both lateral-lateral and anterior-posterior 2D views and increased in 3D. Cuboid height decreased between non-WB and WB images by 1.3 and 6.5 mm in 2D and 3D images respectively (p<0.001).A total of 90 ablation procedures were performed prospectively, each using 3 modalities: NSRFA, HRFA, and MWA. For each modality, 5 ablation procedures were performed for each combination of power (80W, 100W, or 120W) and duration (5, 10, 20, 30, 45, or 60 minutes) . Ablation zone outcome parameter includes transverse diameter (TD), longitudinal diameter (LD), volume (V), front distance (FD), and spherical ratio (SR Purpose: Bias field correction deals with the intra-volume intensity inhomogeneities in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data. It has little significance for visual diagnosis yet it is a crucial step for the automation of radiotherapy solutions. Extensive research and evaluation show that the often used and well-established correction methods typically require parameter tuning for the given dataset or are expensive to compute.A novel method has been introduced, allowing for the training of a convolutional neural network (CNN) on non-medical images, making the model general and evaluating it for bias field correction on medical MRI data.We retrospectively reviewed all patients referred for UAE for symptomatic fibroids at our institution over one year. Patients without a pre-procedural MRI and a six-month post-procedural MRI were excluded from the study. Both pre-and post-UAE images were independently reviewed by two radiologists with subsequent consensus review. In each, dominant intramural fibroids were identified and the following measurements taken: a) 3-dimensional maximal measurements, b) the shortest distance between the fibroid and the endometrial wall, and c) the shortest distance between the fibroid and the serosal wall. Paired sample t-tests and two-sample t-tests were used to compare between pre-and post-UAE variations and between migrated and non-migrated intramural fibroids, respectively. Results: 35 dominant intramural fibroids were identified, of which, 8 migrated to become submucosal fibroids, while 5 were either partially or completely expelled. All migrating fibroids had a pre-UAE minimum distance from the endometrium of 1-2.4 mm and a maximum fibroid diameter greater than 5.1 cm, and none of the non-migrating fibroids had both these characteristics together. Conclusion: Not only is it distressing to patients to have post-procedural pain and bleeding, but fibroid migration could also increase infection risks and affect fertility. Our study found that intramural fibroids with a minimum endometrial distance less than 2.4 mm and a maximum fibroid diameter greater than 5.1 cm have a high likelihood of migrating after UAE. Limitations: Small sample size and low statistical power. Ethics committee approval: n/a Funding: No funding was received for this work. Purpose: A major challenge in prostatic artery embolisation (PAE) is an adequate and distinct visualisation of the feeding prostatic vessels and other branches of the internal iliac arteries. Novel colour-coded parametric images calculated from raw angiographic image data provide additional information compared to common digital subtraction angiography (DSA). Our objective was to investigate the clinical value of parametric images in a PAE setting.We retrospectively examined the selective internal iliac artery image series of 26 patients (mean age: 67.47; SD: 9.76; range: 42-82) undergoing PAE. We generated 230, parametric, colour-coded-delayangiograms (CDAs) from raw image data obtained from a latest-generation angiography system. Three experienced interventional radiologists evaluated the image quality using a 5-point-Likert scale based on clinically relevant criteria (e.g. the identification of dominant feeding arteries, stenoses, and non-target collaterals).A consecutive 27 patients who underwent percutaneous cryoablation with cryoprobes of 2-4 for a renal tumour (median size, 1.9 cm; range, 1.1-4.1 cm) were evaluated. Reconstructed CT images obtained during freezing were used to measure the radiographic ice-ball volume.After completing a last freezing, the melting time of the radiographic ice-ball was analysed with US. The melting time was defined as the time of complete disappearance of intrarenal posterior acoustic shadowing generated by a radiographic ice-ball, which was analysed by two independent radiologists. After removing the cryoprobes, the degree of perirenal haematoma was assessed (i.e. <1 cm versus ≥1 cm in thickness). Serum haemoglobin (Hb) was also investigated before and after cryoablation.This study involved 6 children with cerebral palsy, a form of spastic diplegia. Patients had intact intellect and no seizures in anamnesis. All children received standard treatment, including massage, medical-gymnastics with simulators, 10 daily sessions of physical therapy and neurostimulation of the brain (using a device for electrotactile stimulation called PoNS (portable neurostimulator)).Patients underwent functional MRI of the brain before the start of, and at the end of, the course of treatment. The research was carried out using movement functional paradigms for each extremity (both feet and hands) and an active "count" paradigm for patients who could perform the task for the count and depending on clinical status, and passive movement or sensory paradigms were performed for those who could not. Postprocessing was carried out using the software package SPM 12. Results: All patients noted decreased muscle tone and improved balance and coordination functions after neurostimulation. According to obtained fMRI data, patients who underwent translingual neurostimulation showed increased activation in the right-hand motor area and activation in the foot motor area in response to the stimuli. Conclusion: Translingual neurostimulation is innovative in the field of neurostimulation, non-invasive, and safe and easy to use. fMRI active paradigms, with proper and high-quality implementation, is an auxiliary method for the objective control of treatment efficiency. Limitations: n/a Ethics committee approval: n/a Funding: No funding was received for this work. Purpose: To investigate the alterations of brain structural and functional connectome in unilateral sudden sensorineural hearing loss (USSHL) patients.We constructed functional-structural connectomes for USSHL patients (41 for the left side and 44 for the right side) and 85 controls. Graph theoretical analysis was employed to evaluate the network properties of functional-structural brain connectome. Moreover, we quantified coupling between functional-structural connectome by the correlation between functionalstructural connectome edges within non-zero structural connectivity areas. The coupling of functional-structural brain connectome was compared by using permutation tests. To investigate the clinical relevance of altered brain network topologies in USSHL, Pearson's correlation analysis was performed between the clinical variables and the topological properties. Results: Compared with the control groups, both groups of USSHL patients exhibited a significantly increased clustering coefficient, global efficiency, and local efficiency, but a significantly decreased characteristic path length in functional brain connectome, while a significant decrease clustering coefficient and local efficiency in structural brain connectome. In addition, the primary increased nodal strength was observed in limbic and paralimbic systems primarily as well as in the auditory network brain areas. More importantly, the coupling strength of structural-functional connectome was decreased and exhibited a negative correlation with some USSHL clinical variables in patients. Conclusion: Detectable alteration of network organisation already occurred in USSHL patients within the acute period at the global and regional level. The functional connectome is characterised by a shift toward small-worldization while the structural connectome is toward randomisation, which may indicate a plastic reorganisation procedure of the brain to compensate for the loss of hearing in USSHL. Moreover, the degree of coupling between structural-functional connectome was decreased, which may reflect the pathophysiological mechanisms of USSHL. Purpose: To investigate whether multimodal network graph analyses are relevant in the discussion of the combined fMRI-DTI pre-surgical evaluation of language networks. Methods and materials: A retrospective cross-sectional evaluation of our 39 consecutive patients who underwent pre-surgical BOLD fMRI with 4 language tasks (TR=3s, 3x3x3 mm voxels) was conducted. DTI (32 encoding directions, b=800 s/mm 2 , 2 mm isotropic resolution) was done with a standard SPM12 (https://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm) pipeline for fMRI, with the resulting activation maps further analysed using ICN_Atlas (Kozák et al., NeuroImage, 2017) with AAL atlas ROIs (Tzourio-Mazoyer et al., Neuroimage, 2002) . DTI data was analysed using ExploreDTI with whole-brain tractography (Leemans et al., ISMRM, 2009 ) resulting in AAL-based connectivity matrices. Structural connectiome characteristics calculated with the brain connectivity toolbox (Rubinov and Sporns, NeuroImage, 2010) were compared against fMRI-based language network parameters using conventional parametric statistics in Matlab, focusing on Broca's and Wernicke's areas bilaterally. Results: fMRI lateralisation correlated significantly with structural connectome graph parameters in a task-dependent fashion. The temporal lateralisation of speech comprehension and auditory decision and the frontal lateralisation of picture naming and synonym decision showed significant positive correlations with network metrics-based lateralisation parameters of the temporoparietal areas. The lateralisation of frontal language areas was also reflected in the lateralisation of arcuate fasciculus (AF).We recruited 30 healthy subjects (12 males, 18 female; age 25-80). The waist and hip circumferences of every patient were measured in order to calculate the W-H ratio and on the same day an MR examination was performed on a 3T scanner (Vantage Titan 3T, Canon) with a 32 channels head coil. The MR protocol included a 40 directions DW sequence for the connectometry analysis. The connectometry analysis was performed using a linear regression model to consider the effects of the W-H ratio, choosing three different T-score thresholds (T-threshold) values (1, 2, and 3). Results were considered statistically valid for a p-value adjusted for the false discovery rate (p-FDR) <0.05. The network topology analysis measured the influence of the W-H ratio on brain networks.We performed fMRIs in 32 healthy subjects with a paradigm that involved solving anagrams. After giving an answer, the participants labelled their strategy as 'insight' or 'analytical'. The data was analysed using a GLM with predictors corresponding to different stimulus types and button presses. A random-effects analysis for the population was performed using a t-test over the individual contrast images. Purpose: Our retrospective study investigates whether a correlation exists between functional language lateralisation using fMRI and structural lateralisation using diffusion data of language tracts in controls and tumour patients. Methods and materials: 15 controls and 61 patients were included and underwent structural, functional, and diffusion imaging on 3T MRI. Subjects performed verbal fluency and verb generation language fMRI tasks, and a laterality index (LI) was calculated using data from the cerebral hemisphere and the contralateral cerebellar hemisphere. The diffusion tracts included the long fibres of the arcuate fasciculus, anterior and posterior short fibres of the arcuate fasciculus, uncinate fasciculus, inferior longitudinal fasciculus, inferior frontooccipital fasciculus, and frontal aslant tract. An asymmetry index (AI) for each fibre pair was calculated using the tract volume derived from single tensor (ST) and spherical deconvolution (SD) diffusion data, as well as using the hindrance modulated orientational anisotropy (HMOA) derived from the SD method. A linear regression analysis between fMRI LI and DTI AI was performed. Results: In all subjects, there was no significant correlation between fMRI LI and DTI AI for any of the tracts. Conclusion: Our results do not justify replacing fMRI with tractography in the assessment of language lateralisation. The discordant results between ST-and SD-based asymmetry indices indicate that the structural lateralisation is less robust than the functional one.From 2016 to 2017, 20 patients with AF (group A) and 20 patients with SR (group B) were referred for CCTA with120 kVp tube voltage and auto mAs. The objective IQ including image noise, signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR) were compared respectively. The subjective IQ was evaluated by two radiologists in consensus (1 excellent, 2 good, 3 adequate, 4 poor). The effective radiation dose was calculated for each patient. Results: Group A (8 male, 12 female, mean age 59.1±15.1years, BMI 28.4±5.1kg/cm 2 ), group B (8 male, 12 female, mean age 54.8±18.6 years, BMI 29.0±6.5 kg/cm 2 ) (p>0.05) were recruited. The image noise, CNR and SNR of the 2 groups were 28.7±5. In 24 adult SD rats, the left anterior descending coronary artery was occluded for half hours and released. Low-dose dobutamine stress cardiac cine-MR and late gadolinium enhancement were both performed to analyse wall motion of left ventricle. A three-dimensional and two-dimensional strain of anterior wall and anterior septum, include global peak longitudinal strain (GPLS), radial strain (GPRS), circumferential strain (GPCS), peak radial strain (PRS) and circumferential strain (PCS), were measured at baseline, after reperfusion and dobutamine stress. Triphenyl tetrazolium chloride (TTC) and Evans blue staining were applied to assess viable or nonviable myocardium. Retrospective single-centre study on 210 CTangiography exams performed for TAVI planning. Scans were obtained with dual-source CT scanner (Somatom Definition Flash, Siemens, Erlangen) with retrospective ECG-gated acquisition and bolus-tracking technique. Twodimensional TA was performed using commercial software (TexRAD Ltd, Cambridge, UK), with a filtration histogram method, on polygonal regions-ofinterest (ROI) manually drawn by a single operator on native axial sections reconstructed in diastole and systole; ROIs encompassed the interventricular septum below aortic valve level. Septal thickness (ST), ejection fraction (EF), and aortic valve area (AVA) were recorded in each patient, in order to correlate such parameters with TA features. Statistical analysis was carried out using the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) linear regression model. Significance was fixed at P=0,05. Results: After LASSO analysis 10 TA features were significantly correlated with ST; a radiomic score was calculated (mean value 14,57) with linear regression coefficient 1,3389 (p=2,22x10 -11 ; R 2 =0,2299). 12 TA features were significantly correlated with EF; a radiomic score was calculated (mean value 52,33) with linear regression coefficient 1,2790 (p=5,39x10 -16 ; R 2 =0,2804). 8 TA features were significantly correlated with AVA; a radiomic score was calculated (mean value 0,6670) with linear regression coefficient 1,9824 (p=2,55x10 -5 ; R 2 =0,08807). Conclusion: TA features extracted for myocardial septum correlate with morphologic and functional parameters in patients affect by SA. The correlation with ST suggests a possible correspondence between TA features and myocardial fibrosis or disarray. Limitations: The single-centre study, study design retrospective, small sample. Ethics committee approval: All patients gave written consent to CT. Purpose: To estimate the clinical value of MR tissue tracking in the assessment of left ventricular remodeling in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Methods and materials: 29 patients with T2DM as well as 21 healthy controls were enrolled. Cardiac magnetic resonance(CMR)was used to obtain left ventricular function parameters while MR tissue tracking to get peak strains (PS. Radial PS， circumferential PS and longitudinal PS were calculated with global and 16 regional segments in DM and healthy controls. Together with LVEF， LVEDV and LV Mass, peak strains were compared between DM and controls. Results: LVEF and global longitudinal PS, basal longitudinal PS were statistical significantly smaller for DM (-16.51±2.76 vs -18.00±2.15，P＜0.05; and -11.26±3.69 vs -13.35±3.16 P＜0.05; respectively) . Global and segmental PS had a statistical significant correlation with LVEF (r=0.63, 0.407, 0.571, 0.517, 0.627, 0.243, 0.615, 0.655 , P＜0 .05 separately). Global and basal radial PS，mid longitudinal PS had a significant-good correlation with HaB1C (r=-0.375, -0.367, 0.381，P＜0.05); separate PS had a poor diagnostic value while the union of apical radial PS，basal circumferential PS, global/basal/apical longitudinal PS had a relatively good sensitivity and specify to distinguish DM from healthy controls. Conclusion: There is a statistically significant difference between DM and healthy controls on peak strain，which serves an early measurement of left ventricular remodelling which could potentially be included as a supplementary diagnostic procedure in the evaluation of DM. Limitations: We didn't discuss the left ventricular systolic function of DM. Ethics committee approval: The study was approved by our institutional review board and written informed consent was obtained from all participants. Purpose: Heart failure is a clinical diagnosis characterised by non-specific symptoms such as dyspnoea, fatigue and oedema. The European Society of Cardiology recommends obtaining objective measures for heart failure in order to confirm a diagnosis. However, it can be challenging to obtain objective measures such as echocardiography in the acute setting. CTPA is conventionally used to outrule pulmonary embolus, however, CTPA provides great detail of the heart and lungs as a whole. The aim of this study was to investigate what role CTPA could play in diagnosing heart failure. Methods and materials: We reviewed 230 CTPA results, of these we confirmed which of these patients had heart failure by confirming a heart failure diagnosis with BNP and echocardiogram criteria. We divided the groups into those who had heart failure and those that did not. We then analysed which features found on CTPA were most specific for a diagnosis of heart failure. Purpose: To evaluate the role of the left atrium and left atrial appendage in the recurrence of atrial fibrillation (AF) after radiofrequency ablation. Methods and materials: 63 patients with AF who underwent radiofrequency ablation for the first time were enrolled. According to the recurrence of AF after radiofrequency ablation, the patients were divided into the recurrence group (n = 20 cases) and non-recurrence group (n = 43 cases). All patients underwent a 256-slice spiral CT examination before the operation. The maximum volume of LAA (LAAVmax), minimum volume of LAA (LAAVmin), LAA emptying fraction (LAAEF), and LAA ejection volume (LAAEV), LAA volume strain (LAA-VS), maximum volume of LA (LAVmax), minimum volume of LA (LAVmin), LA emptying fraction (LAEF), LA ejection volume (LAEV), and LA volume strain (LAVS) were measured. Results: The LAAVmax, LAAVmin, LAVmax, and LAVmin in the recurrence group were higher than those in the non-recurrence group (P < 0.05), while LAAEF, LAEF and LAA-VS in the recurrence group were lower than those in the non-recurrence group (P < 0.05). There was no difference in LA-VS between the two groups. LAAEF was an independent predictor of recurrence after radiofrequency ablation of AF. LAAEF < 44.68% had the highest predictive value for recurrence after radiofrequency ablation. Purpose: To reproduce the feasibility of estimating myocardial extracellular volume fraction (ECV) through routine contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) in a cohort of oesophagal cancer patients and to investigate the correlation between an increase in ECV and exposure to radiation therapy. Methods and materials: After ethics committee approval, patients with oesophagal cancer who had undergone routine CT examinations before and after radiation therapy were retrospectively analysed. For each patient, we considered pre-treatment CT and the post-treatment CT with the longest followup interval available. Patients with pre-existing cardiovascular conditions, who previously had undergone cardiotoxic chemotherapy, or with heavily artefacted CT images were excluded. ECV was measured using round regions of interest (ROI) in the septum at mid-level, accounting for movement by excluding borders, and in the left ventricular blood pool at the same level. Septal ECV was calculated using the formula proposed by Bandula et al. T-test for paired data was used to compare distributions. Results: Twenty-one subjects were analysed, with a mean age of 64±18 years, four of which were women. Pre-treatment mean ECV was 27.89±3.54% and post-treatment mean ECV at follow-up was 32.08±4.51% with a median interval of 197 days. Post-treatment ECV was significantly higher than pre-treatment ECV (p<0.001). Conclusion: ECV in oesophageal cancer patients showed to be significantly higher after treatment. Its rise after radiation therapy could play a role in the screening of myocardial condition in oesophageal cancer patients undergoing such treatment.The data for patient weight, height, image field size, and DAP were collated for 100 patients that were referred for lumbar spine radiography on 2 different x-ray units. The first unit used the tube voltage in line with the European guidelines (79kV) while the other unit's tube voltage was not in line with the EU guidelines (63 kV). The data was collected only for the AP projection. After the data collection, the calculations of BMI, effective dose, and dose to selected organs were calculated using a PCXMC2.0 Monte Carlo simulation program. Results: No statistically significant difference was found between the BMIs of the compared groups (p=0.671). When the optimal exposure parameters were used, the DAP value was lower by 79% (p<0.001), the effective dose by 62% (p<0.001), and the average dose to the organs by 73% (p<0.001). The image field was significantly larger when the optimal parameters were used. Therefore, the dose difference should be even higher when the optimal exposure parameters were used if the field size would be the same. Conclusion: Based on the results, we can conclude that the DAP, effective dose, and dose to organs are significantly higher when the exposure parameters used are not in line with the European guidelines. Limitations: The data was obtained for AP projection only and the image quality was not assessed in the study. Ethics committee approval: The national medical ethics committee and patient consent form were obtained prior to the study. The optimisation of the lateral lumbar spine projection using an air-gap technique A. Bellizzi, F. Zarb; Msida/MT (andrea.bellizzi.15@um.edu.mt) Purpose: To investigate the feasibility of replacing an anti-scatter grid with an air-gap technique to achieve a dose reduction for lateral lumbar spine radiography while maintaining image quality on a direct digital radiography (DDR) system.The study comprised of 2 phases. Phase 1 was an experimental study using an anthropomorphic phantom to identify the optimal air-gap technique. Phase 2 was performing lateral projections of the lumbar spine on patients (n=50). Patients were randomly assigned into a control group (n=25, imaged using the anti-scatter grid) and an experimental group (n=25, imaged using the air-gap technique). The dose area product (DAP) of all examinations was recorded, keeping all other variables constant. Image quality evaluation was performed by 5 radiologists performing absolute visual grading analysis (VGA) using an image quality score tool, with the resultant scores analysed using visual grading characteristics (VGC). Results: A 10 cm air-gap in conjunction with a source-to-image distance (SID) of 121 cm was found as the optimal air-gap technique. The clinical application of this technique resulted in a statistically significant (p<0.05) reduction in the radiation dose of 72% in terms of DAP. Image quality scores were higher for the anti-scatter grid but the variation between the image quality of the two techniques was not significant (p>0.05).The study was performed on 84 patients who were referred for thoracic spine radiography in a Croatian hospital using a CR imaging system. Patients were randomly divided into 2 equal groups. The first group was imaged with the current collimation protocol and the second group with the collimation protocol mentioned in the professional literature. For each patient, weight and height, image-field size, exposure conditions, and DAP were measured while the effective dose and absorbed organ doses were calculated using the PCXMC Monte-Carlo simulation method. Image quality was assessed by 2 radiologists and 1 radiographer using the image software ViewDEX.Results: There was no statistically significant difference in BMIs between the groups. With the optimal usage of collimator, it was found that the size of the primary field in the AP projection was reduced by 45% (p<0.001) and in the LAT projection by 41% (p<0.001). The study also showed reduced values of DAP for AP projection by 34% (p=0.007) and for LAT projection by 23% (p=0.040). The effective dose was reduced by 54% (p<0.001) for AP projection and 29% (p<0.001) for LAT projection. The mean absorbed dose to selected organs decreased by 26% in the AP projection and 28% in the LAT projection. Image quality evaluation showed improvement in AP projection by 13% (p=0.001) and in LAT projection by 15% (p<0.001). Conclusion: Optimal collimation in thoracic spine imaging has a strong influence on the reduction of patient exposure to radiation and the improvement of image quality. Limitations: n/a Ethics committee approval: Ethics committee approval obtained. Purpose: To produce a transparent algorithm with the capacity to quickly and cheaply measure the relative performance of plain radiography imaging systems (IS).We used an ETR-1 test plate in combination with several plain radiography IS based on both CR and DR detector technology. We collected 20 radiographs for each focal spot (FS) setting using every IS. The test plate was placed at 20 mm intervals along the z-axis in order to reveal the potential impact of the anode heel effect and focal effect on image quality. We used exposures of 0.5 mAs at 81 kVp in order to avoid noise elimination and saturation. We upgraded our pilot FIJI macro to include affine image transformation functionality and DICOM header interaction. The macro was used to carry out the consistent characterisation of ETR-1's line-pair segments. This data was exported to a series of spreadsheets which were subjected to B A C 617 Sunday Scientific Programme percentile-based formatting as well as an absolute threshold. We also compared equivalent data points belonging to different FS sizes using subtraction. Results: Our results take the form of 1 spreadsheet for each combination of IS and FS setting, containing contrast maintenance values for 20 different spatial frequencies belonging to each exposure. Percentile-based formatting revealed a deterioration of image quality at the margin of every FOV. This effect was more pronounced on the anode side. Threshold implementation revealed minimum levels of contrast at spatial frequencies consistent with each datasets' respective IS limiting spatial resolution. Subtraction revealed that larger FS produce lower quality radiographs. Conclusion: Our upgraded FIJI macro appears to possess the capacity to produce useful and accurate assessments of image quality in plain radiography. Scientific Programme substitute the portosystemic shunting by means of a new histopathological grading system for zone 3 congestion in BCS.In a retrograde study, we reviewed 34 cases of BCS, diagnosed on radiology/pathology basis, who underwent a biopsy of the explanted liver prior to transplantation. Alongside the extent and amount of irreversible fibrosis, we emphasised other pathologic changes including sinusoidal and central venular dilatation. The pathologic slides were rechecked and, according to a new congestion scoring system, patients were categorised considering the extent of central venular and sinusoidal dilatation. Total scores of 3-8 were applied for each patient.Results: According to radiologic findings, 11 patients were in the proximal type subgroup, all representing a histopathologic score of 4 or less (score 3 in 6 patients, score 4 in the others). The remaining 23 patients were in the distal type category, including 7 patients with score 5 and the rest demonstrating score 6 or more. After pathological/radiological correlation, the study revealed that the more proximal the location of the venous obstruction was, the less sinusoidal and central venular dilatation. Results: TIPS indications were refractory ascites (n=89), variceal bleeding (n=41), and other (n=9). The mean MELD score was 12.0 ± 4.6 (6-33). The mean age was 59.1 ± 10.4 (10-78) and the mean follow-up was 12.2 months (± 8.0, range 1-33). In 9 patients (cavernoma n=4, massive thrombosis n=4, and Budd-Chiari n=1), TIPS was directly dilated to 10 mm in diameter. In 122 patients, TIPS was dilated to 8 mm with a final PSG<12 mmHg or a PSG reduction≥40%, compared to the baseline PSG. In 8 patients, not reaching the haemodynamic target, the stent was further dilated to 10 mm in diameter during the same session, reaching the haemodynamic target. Overall clinical success was achieved in 118/139 (85%) patients (80% in refractory ascites, 95% variceal bleeding, and 80% other). Overt hepatic encephalopathy was observed in 21 patients (15% Purpose: We quantitatively evaluated the impact of inter-rater bias in manual segmentations of medical images on the output of artificial neural networks (ANNs). Consistent differences in manual image annotations influence supervised ANNs' training processes. Thus, automatic segmentations of ANNs trained on different sources will be consistently different as well.MRIs of MS patients annotated by two radiologists with different levels of expertise were collected. CT scans of intracranial haemorrhage (ICH) patients were annotated twice: manually and semimanually. We trained an ANN (U-Net) on annotations from one source and tested its output segmentations on annotations from another source, using Dice scores as matching criteria. We used classifier ANNs to test (using hit-rate) if two sets of automatic segmentations produced by two identical U-Nets that were trained on different source segmentations could be distinguished. We calculated MS-lesion loads and ICH volumes based on the raters' and the U-Nets' segmentations and compared the differences. Results: Lower Dice scores were obtained between the outputs of ANNs trained on annotations of one rater and tested on another (cross-evaluation experiment). Classification hit-rates were higher for U-Nets that were trained on different sources than for the sources' Purpose: To investigate whether the accuracy of machine learning models used in radiology degrades with time. Methods and materials: Machine learning (ML) gains an increasing role in radiology. Currently, most ML models use the same static "train once, deploy everywhere" approach. However, the environments and data used by these models evolve all the time. As a result, static models run into the risk of becoming outdated.To verify this hypothesis, we used a full year of operational patient records from Massachusetts General Hospital. We trained several ML models to predict operational events, such as patient wait times or imaging delay times. We varied the age of the training data between 0 (current) and 12 months, and we varied the volume of the training set from 1 to 12 months. The performance of the trained models was then assessed based on the prediction accuracy for one month of test data. The goal was to see whether the size or the age of the training dataset affects the accuracy of the model results. Purpose: To showcase a fully automated workflow combining deep reinforcement learning (DRL) for whole-body volumetric analyses and cloudbased post-processing and storing of data on 10,508 whole-body organ volumes. Methods and materials: 431 retrospectively acquired multiphasic CT datasets with 10,508 volumes were included in the analysis (10,344 abdominal organ volumes, 164 lung volumes). AI-based whole-body organ volumes were determined using a multi-scale DRL for 3D body markers detection and 3D structure segmentation. The algorithm was trained for whole-body organ volumetry on 5,000 datasets. The data was uploaded to a cloud-based application with integrated DRL software, allowing to group data by diseases. Total processing time for all volumes and mean calculation time per case was recorded. Repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) were conducted to test for robustness, considering the contrast phase and slice thickness. Final whole-body organ metrics were automatically outputted in comma-separated values format.In order to establish the framework of AI deployment in the clinical workflow, working groups were formed at a group and country level between clinical, legal, data protection, digital, operational, commercial, and marketing to identify all areas of relevance in a project management approach. Purpose: The gold standard is critical for clinical validation studies but usually time-consuming for researchers. This project aimed to explore whether a deep learning (DL)-based artificial intelligence (AI) diagnostic system would benefit the researchers in establishing the gold standard by reducing the discrepancies between them.In this study, we utilised 196 CXR scans which were diagnosed as either pneumonia or effusion and employed the DL AI system (InferRead DR Chest Research, Infervision) to study its effects in eliminating the discrepancies when generating the gold standard. Two senior radiologists participated in the reader study. They reviewed the CXR images with and without the aid of an AI diagnostic system at an interval of 4 weeks. Discrepancies of their reviewing results were analysed and evaluated by Cohen's Kappa index. Results: There were 18 cases that were diagnosed differently by the two senior radiologists when they reviewed the CXR images alone. With the assistance of the AI diagnostic system, the number of differentially diagnosed cases dropped to 7 cases, leading to a 61.1% reduction in discrepancies. Of note, the Kappa scores increased from 0.806 to 0.928 after utilising the AI diagnostic system. In particular, according to the ground truth of these CXR images, utilisation of the AI diagnostic system eliminated 17 discrepancy cases in which 8 false-positive cases and 7 false-negative cases were corrected. Meanwhile, among the 6 new introduced discrepancy cases, one was a false-positive case that was corrected by one radiologist with the help of the AI system.Purpose: BOLD-MRI can provide regional measurements of oxygen content using deoxyhaemoglobin paramagnetic characteristics. Chronic kidney disease (CKD) can affect oxygenation levels in renal parenchyma, which influences the clinical course of the disease. Furosemide may make Na+ -K+ -ATP pump work reduction and oxygen consumption decrease. The goal of this study was to assess renal oxygenation levels in CKD using BOLD-MRI when injecting furosemide. Methods and materials: 18 healthy subjects and 39 patients with CKD underwent a renal scan using a multi-gradient-recalled-echo (mGRE) sequence with 16 echoes, and 28 of 39 patients underwent the same sequence 7 minutes after injecting furosemide. R2* values of three regions of interest (ROI) of the renal cortex and medulla were measured and their average values were calculated. The difference of R2* was compared between the healthy subjects and all patients. According to eGFR, 28 patients with injected furosemide were divided into a normal eGFR group (group 1,≥90 mL/min/1.73 m 2 ) and an abnormal eGFR group (group 2,<90 mL/min/1.73 m 2 ), and the changes of R2* in the two groups after injection were compared. 28 of the 39 patients were confirmed by ultrasound-guided puncture and the other 11 patients had a similar diagnosis based on clinical symptoms and investigations. Purpose: To retrospectively determine the diagnostic values of a VI-RAD score for the detection of muscle invasion in patients with bladder tumours. Methods and materials: This study included 347 consecutive patients with 339 tumour lesions who were previously diagnosed by CT imaging and subsequently underwent bladder multiparametric MR imaging between January 2015 and March 2019. Lesions level analyses were performed by using an overall score of VI-RADS. Histologic examination of TURBT was used as the reference standard. Two radiologists assessed the diagnostic scores of tumours with muscle invasion by using cutoff values of ≥ 4 and ≥ 3. Cutoff values for VI-RADS scores were estimated from operating points of AUC analyses. Sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV, and accuracy were calculated to assess the utility of VI-RADS Results: The interobserver agreement was excellent for three different MR imaging at the lesion level. T2W and DW imaging had a similar diagnostic accuracy of 79.3% for tumour lesions with muscle invasion compared to the overall score of 80.2%, with a cutoff value of 4. The overall VI-RAD score showed an accuracy of 80.2%, with a cutoff value of ≥ 4, granting a sensitivity of 91.3%, specificity of 76.0%, PPV of 83.3%, and NPV of 78.9%. When we applied an arbitrary overall score of ≥ 3, accuracy was 63.7%, sensitivity was 94.6%, specificity was 43.9%, PPV was 51.6%, and NPV was 63.7%. Conclusion: VI-RADS has an overall good performance for the diagnosis of tumours with muscle invasion. Limitations: The current study was a single-centre retrospective study with a small number of participants. As a consequence, a statistical significance was not observed in comparing each result. For these results to be more definitive, prospective studies with larger numbers of patients are required. Ethics committee approval: n/a Funding: No funding was received for this work. Purpose: Cochlear implantation is the recommended treatment for patients presenting with severe to profound pre-or post-lingual sensorineural hearing loss. Imaging plays a pivotal role in the selection of candidates. A pre-operative knowledge of variant anatomy helps in the planning of the surgical approach and aids in identifying potential complications. Methods and materials: Patients suffering from profound to severe sensorineural hearing loss with the candidacy for cochlear implantation were evaluated by high-resolution CT of the temporal bone (HRCT). A total of 100 cases were referred from July 2018 to February 2019 and were included in the study after taking patient consent. Many anatomical variants were observed including mastoid pneumatisation, level of middle cranial fossa dura, Korner's septum, mastoid emissary vein, sigmoid sinus and jugular bulb position, bony facial canal, position of mastoid segment of facial nerve canal with respect to round window for visualisation of round window during surgery and alignment of cochlear basal turn with respect to axis of internal carotid artery canal for round window accessibility.The clinical data of 80 patients with progressive intracranial haemorrhage were analysed retrospectively, mobile CT and conventional CT examination were performed in each of 40 cases. On two groups of a bleeding area of image quality was evaluated by two senior radiologists and records of two patients completed the inspection time, radiation dose and statistical analysis of the results. Results: All patients were successfully completed by a CT head scan. The time required for a mobile CT group examination was (9.21±2.13 min), significantly lower than that of the normal group (47.43±7.10 min), the difference was statistically significant. The effective radiation dose was (1.52±0.00 mSv), lower than the normal group (1.90±0.40 mSv), the difference was statistically B A C 634 Sunday Scientific Programme significant. Two groups of bleeding area image quality by which difference was not statistically significant. The examining flow of mobile CT group was reduced three links and three medical staff than the normal group. Conclusion: Mobile CT examination has higher timeliness and reduces the risk of mobile CT scanning in intensive care patients, saved labor cost and reduced radiation dose, could be better served for the ICU patients who had head CT examining needs. Limitations: In this study, the body mass index, age and patients were not quantitatively analysed before or after surgery, and further studies will be conducted in the follow-up work. Ethics committee approval: n/a Funding: This study was funded by the 1.3.5 project for disciplines of excellence, West China Hospital, Sichuan University. Purpose: To test the hypothesis that Jaccoud arthropathy (JA) in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients is associated with abnormal extensor digitorum (ED) tendons displacement during flexion of the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints. Methods and materials: 16 SLE patients with JA (JA+), 12 SLE patients without JA (JA-), and 24 control subjects were included in the study. Transverse spinecho T1-weighted MR sequences of the MCP joints in flexion and in extension were obtained in each hand of SLE patients and in one randomly-selected hand of control subjects. Two radiologists separately measured the amplitude and the direction of the displacement of the ED tendons with respect to the midline at the level of the MCP joints. Statistical analysis included two-way ANOVA with random effects to assess differences in amplitude (p<0.0083), Fisher-Freeman-Halton's exact test to assess differences in direction (p<0.0063), and Gwet's AC1 score to determine interobserver agreement.In this prospective study, multiparametric MRIs of the radiocarpal cartilage were performed in 26 participants (16 male, 10 female; mean age 39.5±14.7 years, range 20-70 years) using a 3-Tesla MRI. The cohort consisted of 14 patients with distal radial fractures and 12 healthy volunteers. The radiocarpal cartilage was assessed using morphological (DESS, TrueFISP) and biochemical (T2*) MRI sequences without the application of an intravenous contrast agent. The modified Outerbridge classification system for morphological analyses and region-of-interest biochemical analysis were applied to assess the degree of cartilage damage in each patient. Results: Morphological cartilage assessment showed no significant difference between the DESS sequence and the reference standard, TrueFISP (p= 0.75).In the morphological (DESS, TrueFISP) and biochemical (T2*) assessments, patients with intra-articular fractures did not show greater cartilage damage than those with extra-articular fractures (DESS, p=0.62, TrueFISP, p=0.32, and T2*, p=0.97). Significantly greater cartilage degradation was observed after distal radius fracture compared to controls (DESS, p=0.0001, TrueFISP, p=0.0001, and T2*, p=0.009). Conclusion: Magnetic resonance imaging using advanced, multiparametric sequences facilitates accurate, non-invasive assessment of cartilage changes after distal radius fracture without the need for a contrast agent. Post-traumatic radiocarpal cartilage damage did not differ between fractures with intra-and extra-articular extension, but patients with fractures showed significantly higher cartilage degradation compared to healthy controls.Limitations: A small sample size. No arthroscopic or histological confirmation. Missing inter-and intra-reader reliability for biochemical imaging.Ethics committee approval: 5087R. Approved by the local review board. Funding: No funding was received for this work. Author Disclosures: V. Mori: nothing to disclose C. Schleich: nothing to disclose D. B. Abrar: nothing to disclose M. Frenken: nothing to disclose G. Antoch: nothing to disclose L. Oezel: nothing to disclose S. Gehrmann: nothing to disclose L. Wollschläger: nothing to disclose RPS 1710-9 09:28Defining the normal reference range for the cross-sectional area of the median nerve at the wrist and forearm using high-resolution ultrasonography in asymptomatic Asian adults M. Rauf, F. Raza, R. Nazir, B. Yawar Faiz, R. Aqeel; Islamabad/PK (mari23392@gmail.com)Purpose: Ultrasonography (USG) is a reliable, inexpensive, readily available, and painless modality for the diagnosis of carpal tunnel syndrome. However, the main sonographic criteria of the cross-sectional area (CSA) of the median nerve shows a wide normal variation depending on regional and ethnical differences, which warrants the establishment of the normal range of variability in the dimensions of the median nerve in the local population. In our experience, the normal average cross-sectional area of the median nerve in the asymptomatic adult Asian population is relatively small compared to other populations worldwide. Methods and materials: 500 asymptomatic patients/1,000 median nerves were evaluated by high-resolution USG using Toshiba Aplio 500 at the distal wrist crease and mid-forearm 12 cm above the distal wrist crease by 3 expert radiologists independently over a period of 2 years (July 2017-July 2019).We performed a retrospective analysis of 62 cases, including 52 consecutive patients who had a presentation at >14 days from initial symptoms and underwent CMR as part of a complete diagnostic work-up for clinically suspected myocarditis in accordance to current guidelines. 26 patients were included in each of the CM and DCM groups and 10 individuals served as normal controls. The CMR protocol at 1.5T included non-contrast T1-mapping using a 5(3)3 MOLLI acquisition. We analysed a mid-myocardial slice for overall and segmental myocardial T1-relaxation. A Wilcoxon rank sum test was used to assess the differences between the groups. Purpose: The diagnoses of acute myocarditis (AM) and hypertensive heart disease (HHD) remain difficult and are commonly based on a combination of clinical expertise and a multi-parameter diagnostic workup including contrastenhanced cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR). It was our purpose to evaluate a multiparametric set of native imaging parameters for their diagnostic accuracy. Methods and materials: A total of 33 AM and 21 HHD patients who had been referred to our department between 09/2014 and 09/2017, as well as 50 carefully selected healthy volunteers, (HV) underwent CMR at 3T. Subsequent featuretracking strain analysis and native T1/T2 mapping were performed and results were processed in the form of binary logistic regressions. Cut-off values, areas under the curve (AUC), and corresponding sensitivities and specificities were derived from receiver operator characteristic curves. Purpose: Hypertensive heart disease (HHD) and acute myocarditis (AM) can both present with increased myocardial mass despite different pathophysiology. The differentiation between them remains difficult. The accompanying distinct patterns of altered myocardial deformation, however, can be investigated using a feature tracking (FT)-CMR strain. Hence, the aim was to evaluate whether new strain ratios including the myocardial mass per body surface area (MyoMass/BSA) yield additional value in the differentiation between both diseases and healthy volunteers. Methods and materials: Patients with AM (n=43) and HHD (n=28) underwent CMR at 3T between 09/2014 and 09/2017. A group of 61 healthy volunteers (HV) served as normal controls. FT-strain analysis was performed and natural strain values were evaluated for gender and age-specific differences. Subsequently, gender-neutral strain parameters were calculated and indexed to the MyoMass/BSA, leading to ratio strains. These were then evaluated for their discriminatory accuracy by means of areas under the curve (AUC), sensitivity, and specificity. Results: There were statistically significant differences in strains between genders (p<0.05) but not between age groups. For the differentiation between HV and AM, the global circumferential strain ratio performed best (AUC 0.86, 79% sensitivity, and 82% specificity). In discriminating between HV and HHD, as well as AM and HHD, the global longitudinal strain ratio outperformed all other parameters (AUCs 0.96/0.79, 92%/89% sensitivity, and 86%/66% specificity, respectively).A prospective study was done between October 2017-October 2018 in our tertiary centre. DECT was performed using a 128-slice dualsource scanner (Siemens Somatom Definition Flash) for indications including staging, loco-regional extent, nodal status, and metastatic workup. Non-contrast (NC) and post-contrast (PC) sequences were evaluated for nodule size, attenuation value (Av), and iodine concentration (Ic). FNA/histopathology was used as a gold standard. Results: A total of 30 patients (21 females) having a mean age of 47.4 years were included. 15 patients had BTD and 15 patients had MTD including papillary carcinoma (n=9, 60%) and non-papillary malignancies (n=6, 40%). Benign nodules were larger than malignant nodules (mean size 42.9 vs 24.7mm respectively, p=0.013). MTD had higher PC Av (mean HU 116.4) than BTD (82.6), while they had lower NC Av (48.7 vs 62.1, p=0.006). MTD had higher PC Ic than BTD (2.83 mg/ml vs 1.32 mg/ml, p=0.001). The difference between PC Ic and NC Ic was defined as ∆Ic and that between PC Av and NC Av was defined as ∆Av. MTD had higher ∆Ic and ∆Av than BTD (2.45mg/ml vs 0.93mg/ml, p=0.001 and 67.7 vs 20.5, p=0.002 Purpose: To review the preoperative MRI of patients with primary hyperparathyroidism who underwent surgery for parathyroid adenoma (PtA) and to investigate the morphological features that help differential diagnosis. Methods and materials: Parathyroid MRIs of 184 patients from 2015-2018 were reviewed. Only 69 patients were operated on. 5 patients were excluded and 5 patients had bilateral lesions. In summary, 69 lesions from a total of 64 patients were analysed. Axial, sagittal, and coronal fat-saturated T2W TSE and axial pre/post-contrast T1W TSE sequences were obtained in a 1.5T MR system. T2W hyperintensity, oblonged morphology, "reverse-D" appearance, strong enhancement, and the extension to paraesophageal region were investigated. Sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive value were calculated for each finding (p<0.05).Results: 56 were classified as parathyroid adenoma and 8 as non-PtA, pathologically. MR was negative in 5 lesions. The mean lesion size was 15 mm (4-44.8 mm). Of the 56 adenomas, 51 were T2A hyperintense while 38 showed strong enhancement. Oblonged morphology was present in 40 adenomas, "reverse D" appearance in 36, and paraesophageal extension in 16 adenomas. None of non-PtA lesions showed extension. There was a statistical significance for the strong enhancement (p=0.019) and sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy values were 70%, 75%, and 71%, respectively. The "reverse D" appearance described for the first time in the literature has been shown to be a common finding in adenomas and sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy values were 64%, 63%, and 64%, respectively. Conclusion: Images on the sagittal plane may contribute to a morphological analysis for PtA in parathyroid MRI and oblonged morphology with reverse D appearance may facilitate the diagnosis. Purpose: Visualisation of peroneal vessels prior to autologous transplantation of osteomyocutaneous fibular flap for mandibular reconstruction is essential for surgical success. Our aim was to improve and simplify the pre-surgical diagnostics of peroneal perforators using a dedicated dual-energy CTA protocol and semiautomatic vessel unfolding algorithm. Methods and materials: CTA of the lower limbs was performed in 20 patients using dual-energy acquisitions from a third-generation dual-source CT and a high iodine flux (7mL/s, 350 mg/mL). Monoenergetic reconstructions (40 keV) were automatically reconstructed from the scanner and used for the semiautomatic centreline labelling of the peroneal arteries and their lateral perforators on a post-processing console using a dedicated vascular workflow. Curved MIP reconstruction was regarded as a gold standard. Vessel unfolding reconstruction was performed using a prototype software application. Number and length of perforator arteries were compared between curved MIP reconstruction, thin slice MIP in coronal orientation, posterior VRT, and coronal vessel unfolding of each lower limb. Results: The vessel unfolding algorithm was applicable in all patients and significantly more perforator arteries could be detected compared to thin slice MIP and VRT reconstructions. The mean perforator length was only 7% shorter than in the gold standard, whereas values from thin slice MIP and VRT were significantly shorter. Bone superposition was less frequent in vessel unfolding compared to thin slice MIP. Conclusion: The combination of low monoenergetic reconstructions and vessel unfolding allows for a comprehensive and precise presentation of small peroneal perforator vessels prior to autologous transplantation. Purpose: Non-static metal implants like pacemakers frequently lead to heavy streak-shaped artefacts in reconstructed CT image volumes. The reliable evaluation of neighbouring anatomy, for instance with regard to inflammation or calcification, might thereby be limited. Furthermore, motion precludes application of standard second pass metal artefact reduction (MAR) methods, which implicitly assume a static object during CT acquisition. We propose a MAR pipeline which is robust regarding motion and applicable on a wide range of scanner types, acquisition modes, and contrast protocols.The MAR pipeline uses raw projection data and is therefore independent of 3D motion blur. It is comprised of three convolutional neural network ensembles which are trained from scratch. First, SegmentationNets identify metal-affected line integrals in the input raw projection data. Second, values within the predicted metal shadow are treated as missing data and refilled based on surrounding line integrals by means of the InpaintingNets. The CT volume without metal is obtained by filtered backprojection of the inpainted sinogram. Finally, the ReinsertionNets determine metal positions in the image domain based on the segmented metal shadow.

MyT3 4-18

Application of FLAIR vascular hyperintensity-DWI mismatch in ischaemic stroke, depending on semi-quantitative DWI-Alberta stroke programme early CT score 

RPS 411-3

An apparent diffusion coefficient of different areas of the brain in growthrestricted foetuses MyT3 5-8Hand extensor compartments: how to study them and is it always their fault? MyT3 5-10 Accuracy of volumetric trabecular bone mineral density assessment using dual-source dual-energy CT: a prospective phantom study and comparison with quantitative CT 

MyT3 5-19

Use of DISCOGEL® to treat cervical and lumbar discal bulging: results and consideration in our monocentric experience 

RPS 502-4

The early effects of a mammography screening program on advanced breast cancer incidence in the Friuli Venezia Giulia Italian region 

RPS 502-6

Delayed breast cancer diagnoses in women recalled at screening mammography: trends in the proportions and lengths of delay over two decades of screening 

RPS 605a-9

A radiomics-based model to identify the aetiology of liver cirrhosis using gadoxetic acid-enhanced MRI 

RPS 603a-10

Using myocardial extracellular volume fraction to differentiate healthy from cardiomyopathic myocardium using dual-source dual-energy CT 

RPS 601b-9

Interobserver variability in the evaluation of magnetic resonance elastography in patients with fibrotic liver disease 

RPS 601b-11

Can T1-mapping serve as an alternative to MR-elastography in the staging of liver fibrosis? 

RPS 608-2

Diagnostic performance of US-guided core-needle biopsy versus fineneedle aspiration for diagnosing thyroid neoplasm as a first-line biopsy method: a propensity score matching study 

RPS 609a-11

The role of multi-detector computed tomography angiography for preprocedural planning and radiation dose reduction in bronchial artery embolisation 

RPS 609b-9

A preclinical endogenous rat HCC model system for the prospective evaluation of imaging-derived biomarkers in interventional tumour therapy 

RPS 601c-2

Non-invasive assessment of liver cirrhosis with multiphasic dual energy CT using iodine maps: correlation with model of end-stage liver disease score 

RPS 605c-11

The influence of AI-based computer-aided diagnosis systems on diagnosis confidence in medical experts with different levels of experience 

RPS 701-9

Utility of dynamic oesophagogram in the grading of achalasic patients: comparison with static x-ray barium swallow and correlation with clinical subtypes 

RPS 1011a-10

The predictive power of MRI in identifying the pathological grading of meningiomas 

RPS 1007-4

The role of sonosalpingography (SSG) using normal saline in female subfertility: diagnostic or therapeutic?; Moradabad/IN (rajulrst@yahoo.co.in) Purpose:

Conclusion:

Limitations: Ethics committee approval: Funding:Author Disclosures:Our results show a good correlation between radiomics features, disease aggressiveness, mutational profile, and the risk of recurrence. Results are promising but validation on external datasets will be necessary to confirm the role as an imaging biomarker. Purpose: To accurately identify the relationship between the portal radiomics score (rad-score) and the pathologic superior mesenteric vein (SMV) resection margin in patients with cancer in the head of the pancreas. Methods and materials: 181 patients with pathologically confirmed cancer in the head of the pancreas who underwent multislice computed tomography within one month of resection from January 2016-December 2018 were retrospectively investigated. For each patient, 1,029 radiomics features of the portal phase were extracted, which were reduced using the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) logistic regression algorithm. Multivariate logistic regression models were used to analyse the association between the portal rad-score and SMV resection margin. Results: Patients with negative (R0) and positive (R1) margins accounted for 70.17% (127) and 29.83% (54) of the cohort, respectively. The rad-score, which is based on 11 selected portal phase features, was significantly associated with the SMV resection margin status (P<0.05). Multivariate analyses confirmed a significant and independent association between the portal rad-score and SMV resection margin (P<0.0001); a higher portal rad-score was associated with R1 resection (P for trend <0.0001).The portal rad-score is independently and positively associated with the risk of the SMV R1 resection in pancreatic head cancer. Limitations: Retrospective in nature, the results were established based on data obtained from a single centre, and the available samples were limited. Purpose: Attenuation characteristics of the pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and contrast material uptake vary depending on the histological grade and pancreatic parenchyma condition. The purpose of this study was to compare dynamic contrast enhancement (DCE) and radiomics features in predicting pancreatic adenocarcinoma grades. The data obtained from an analysis of the radiomics of pancreatic cancer can subsequently be used to predict the prognosis of patients with PDAC and for the inclusion of big data analysis in the diagnosis process. Methods and materials: 62 consecutive patients with histologically-confirmed PDAC who underwent CE-MDCT were enrolled in the study. We compared the mean lesion attenuation and relative tumour enhancement ratio (RTE) of different types of PA and radiomics features using arterial, venous, and delayedphase MDСT scans. Purpose: To investigate the CT imaging appearance of pancreatic solid pseudopapillary neoplasm (pSPN) in predicting pathological invasive behaviours.Our study shows the utility of renal MRI-based volume in patients with ADPKD to analyse prediction factors.Limitations: This study was limited by the number of patients due to a rare genetic disease. Ethics committee approval: n/a Funding: No funding was received for this work. Purpose: The purpose is to investigate texture analysis findings', the structure analysis application in radiological imaging, efficacy in the differential diagnosis of kidney masses renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and oncocytoma, contribution to the classification of RCC subtypes and relationship with the nuclear stage of RCC. Purpose: To investigate monoexponential, biexponential, and stretchedexponential models of diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) for the assessment of prognostic features in endometrial cancer (EC). Methods and materials: 61 consecutive EC patients confirmed by pathology underwent multiple-b value DWI (0-1200s/mm 2 ) preoperatively at 3.0T MR scanner. The apparent diffusion-weighted (ADC), biexponential model-derived parameters (D, D* and f) and stretched-exponential model-derived parameters (DDC and α) were measured by two radiologists independently. All parameters were compared between the deep and superficial of myometrial invasion, with and without cervical stromal infiltration (CSI), presence and absence of lymphovascular invasion(LVSI). ROC curve and intraclass correlation coefficient analysis were used for statistical evaluation in predicting prognostic factors of EC. Results: Except for D* values, all of the parameters were significantly lower in tumours with deep myometrial invasion(DMI) than those invading superficial myometrial wall and the AUC was largest for ADC values(AUC:0.794). There was a significant difference between groups with and without CSI for ADC and f values and the f values exhibited best diagnostic performance in the prediction of CSI(AUC:0.825). The presence of LVSI had significant lower ADC, f and DDC values than those absences of LVSI and the DDC values showed the best diagnostic performance in the diagnosis of LVSI (AUC:0.759).The current study demonstrated that the prediction of prognostic factors for EC is feasible by multiple mathematical DWI models, which could be conducive to the pre-treatment risk classification to facilitate the selection of the optimal therapeutic approach and meet the demand for greater personalisation of cancer care. Limitations: It was a single-centre study with relatively small sample size and 13 b-values for the multiple b-value of DWI protocol prolonged the scan time. Ethics committee approval: Information about review board approval and written informed consent. Purpose: The aim of this study was to compare the diagnostic quality of acquired and computed high b-value images in diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (DWI) of the prostate in a setting, where the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is increased at high b-values by means of larger voxel sizes. Methods and materials: 34 patients with a PI-RADS 4/5 lesion in the peripheral zone were included. DWI was acquired (aDWI) with four b-values (0, 800, 1500, and 3000 s/mm²) at 3T. The nominal resolution was adapted to roughly keep the SNR constant. Computed-DWI (cDWI) were generated with the respective unweighted image and the acquired b-values, e.g. b3000 from b0 and b800 (cDWI3000-800). This resulted in two acquired and two computed images for each b-value (including b0) summarising to ten images. The three b0 images were pooled. Four readers performed a forced-choice pairwise comparison for representative lesions of all ten images and assessed lesion conspicuity and the ability to locate the lesion. Results: Concerning lesion conspicuity, cDWI3000-1500 scored highest (6.71) followed by cDWI1500-800 (5.71), and cDWI1500-3000 (5.14). For the ability to localise the lesion, cDWI800-1500 scored highest (5.82), followed by aDWI800 (5.41), and cDWI1500-3000 (5.40).In this study diagnostic performance of DWI in prostate magnetic resonance imaging was achieved for the combination of acquired b1500 and computed b3000. Therefore, we recommend to acquire images as high as b1500 and to compute the remaining images. Limitations: Potentially the most important limitation is that whole-mount prostate histology data were not available because prostatectomy is rarely performed at our hospital. The geometric parameters evaluated in 2D were different compared to 3D, which is likely caused by over-projection and the specific point of view. We expect that 3D measurement tools are more univocal and therefore more suitable for future use. Also, switching to 3D enables advanced analysis such as obtaining joint space maps. Purpose: Normal saline infusion radiofrequency ablation (NSRFA) is a widely accepted treatment for tumours up to 3 cm in diameter. Microwave ablation (MWA) and hydrochloric acid infusion radiofrequency ablation (HRFA) may be better alternatives for larger tumours, but few studies comparing these 2 modalities have been published. Thus, this study is aiming to compare ablation zone sizes and shapes resulting from HRFA and MWA, using NSRFA as a control in an ex vivo bovine liver model.Our results do not support the use of resting-state fMRI instead of task-based fMRI for hemispheric dominance assessment. Limitations: Our sample is relatively small and heterogenous. Ethics committee approval: Written informed consent was obtained from all subjects.Funding: This work was part of the UCLH Project ID number: 09/H0716/18. Author Disclosures: V. Lolli: nothing to disclose S. Wastling: nothing to disclose L. Mancini: nothing to discloseThe reorganisation of language function is a visualisable phenomenon in left and right TLE, both before and after surgery. Functional connectivity analysis reveals more widespread network changes than fMRI activation analysis and may offer a more comprehensive view on language architecture. Some connectivity measures may serve as biomarkers for language performance. Limitations: n/a Ethics committee approval: n/a Funding: No funding was received for this work. Purpose: Functional connectivity abnormalities, such as default mode network (DMN), have been reported previously in trigeminal neuralgia (TN) of which chronic pain is a common symptom. However, little is known about the dynamic functional connectivity (dFC) in patients with TN. Methods and materials: 29 patients with TN were enrolled in this study and underwent rest-functional MRI scanning along with 24 age-, sex-, and educationmatched healthy control (HC) subjects. A sliding-window approach was used to study the dFC based on the GIFT (group ICA of fMRI toolbox).The temporal lobe language networks seem to have a defining role in whole-brain language organisation, shown by the observed functionalstructural correlations that are in line with previous literature (Wylie and Regner Purpose: Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the gold-standard imaging tool for compressive spinal cord myelopathy (CSCM). Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), especially fibre-tracking or tractography (DTT), has been considered superior to routine MRI in predicting prognosis and urgency of decompression. This study aims to evaluate DTT as an advanced dimension of MRI in patients with CSCM in predicting the necessity of decompression management. Methods and materials: 12 patients with clinical signs of CSCM underwent conventional MRI and DTI examination with a high-resolution matrix on a 1.5T magnet system. 3D-colour-coded maps were obtained in the sagittal and coronal planes. The presence or absence of parenchymal signal alteration and change in colour-code of the neural fibre tracts in the spinal cord, in addition to the integrity and homogeneous thickness of the fibre tracts on DTT, was evaluated. A near-homogeneous blue colour in the spinal cord and cauda equina was considered normal in our study, with the blue colour representing diffusion in the craniocaudal direction. Alteration in colour, thickness, and integrity, especially at the level of compression on T2W images, was considered significant. Results: Out of 12 patients, 9 had signs of CSCM secondary to infective spondylodiskitis, 1 secondary to a disk protrusion, 1 secondary to a disk extrusion, and 1 secondary to the metastatic collapse of the vertebra. In 8/12 patients with no spinal cord parenchymal signal alteration on T2W images, DTT revealed significant alteration in the colour-code both at and above the level of compression, signifying altered diffusion. Conclusion: DTT is a more sensitive indicator of spinal cord compression than conventional MRI by revealing colour alterations, thinning and loss of integrity of spinal nerve fibre tracts, and providing an easy and fast tool to predict the need for surgical decompression. Limitations: n/a Ethics committee approval: n/a Funding: No funding was received for this work. Author Disclosures: R. Rastogi: nothing to disclose N. Jain: nothing to disclose RPS 1611-13 17:12The role of the waist-to-hip ratio in brain networks: a connectometry study M. Porcu, E. Scapin, P. Garofalo, A. Caneglias, F. Destro, A. Operamolla, L. Saba; Cagliari/IT (micheleporcu87@gmail.com)Purpose: It is known from the literature that BMI influences cerebral networks. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the influence of the waist-to-hip ratio (W-H ratio) on brain networks by using the connectometry technique.The W-H ratio influences brain networks. More studies are needed in order to fully understand these results.Limitations: The small number of patients recruited and the DW parameters adopted, in particular, the low b-values. Ethics committee approval: The study was approved by the local ethical committee. Informed consent was obtained. Purpose: Insight is the sudden and unpredictable appearance of a problem's solution. The role of various brain structures in the generation of the insight phenomenon remains poorly understood. We aimed to study the neural correlates of the insight process during fMRI.The study showed that non-gated low-dose chest CT can be effectively used both for lung cancer screening and coronary calcium scoring with lower radiation exposure to patients than in gated calcium score. Purpose: Minimally invasive multivessel coronary artery bypass grafting (MICS CABG) has shown its safety, effectiveness and high rates of reproducibility, but graft patency data is lacking. In this study we retrospectively analyse CTangiographic graft patency and mid-to early long-term outcomes in patients, subjected to MICS CABG in our institution. Methods and materials: 245 patients were subjected to MICS CABG by small left side thoracotomy approach between July 2014 and December 2018. LITA harvesting, proximal and distal anastomoses were performed under direct vision. SVG/radial artery conduits were harvested endoscopically. Patients were examined with 128-slice CT coronary angiography. Angiographic results achieved for 127 (51.8%) patients (mean follow-up 31.1±7.8 months, range 15 -45 months). Results: All patients achieved complete revascularisation. The mean number of grafts was 2.6±0.5. Perioperative mortality was 0.4% (1 patient). There were 2 conversions to sternotomy (0.8%), 4 reopenings for bleeding (1.6%), 3 perioperative MI (1.2%) and 1 CVA (0.4%). 22 (9.0%) patients received transfusions. 83.2% of patients were followed-up clinically (range 12 -56 months). Long-term mortality was 4.4% (9 patients Purpose: To detect survived myocardium by low-dose dobutamine stress with tissue tracking using cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging and evaluate the prognosis of survived myocardium.The application of low-dose dobutamine stress cardiac MR with tissue tracking may provide an objective and accurate method to evaluate survived myocardium. Limitations: The data still has to be interpreted with caution given the small sample size. Ethics committee approval: This study was approved by Institutional Animal Research Committee of our local institute. (daniel.preuss@mailbox.org) Purpose: To investigate whether perfusion defect (PD) interpretation of myocardial CT perfusion (CTP) should be different in patients with suspected or known coronary artery disease (CAD) for the detection of obstructive CAD. Methods and materials: A total of 134 consecutive patients with known or suspected CAD prospectively underwent CTP. Rest and stress PDs were retrospectively interpreted in four reading categories (RC): RC 1 (stress volume positive), RC 2 (rest or stress volume positive), RC 3 (stress-induced PDs positive), RC 4 (stress-induced and partially reversible PDs positive). Detection of ≥50% diameter stenosis in the supplying artery on quantitative coronary angiography (reference 1) and intervention (reference 2) served as the reference standards. Results: When using reference 1, per-patient analysis revealed AUCs of RC 1-4 of 0.74, 0.65, 0.62, and 0.72, respectively, in patients with known CAD. In these patients, AUC of RC 1 was higher than RC 3 (P= .03) and, respectively, AUC of RC 4 was higher than RC 3 (P= .006). In patients with suspected CAD, AUCs of RC 1-4 were the same (0.83, 0.86, 0.85, 0.88; all P> .05). When using reference 2, AUCs of RC 1-4 in patients with known CAD (0.61, 0.60, 0.67, 0.69) and, respectively, in patients with suspected CAD (0.75, 0.80, 0.76, 0.80) were the same at per-patient level analysis (all P> .05). Conclusion: In patients with known or suspected CAD, every stress PD should be judged positive to detect obstructive CAD in myocardial CTP regardless of its presentation in rest. Limitations: Study design is retrospective. Ethics committee approval: IRB approval and written informed consent were obtained. IT (filippo.vaccher0@gmail.com) Purpose: To assess the potential of texture analysis (TA) of native images of the interventricular septum to detect structural myocardial changes in patients with aortic valve stenosis (AVS), candidates to transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVI).The results imply that replacing the anti-scatter grid with an optimal air-gap technique in lateral lumbar spine digital radiography provides a significant dose reduction whilst still maintaining diagnostic image quality. Limitations: Differences in lateral thickness was a variable, limited by matching mean thickness for both groups. More air-gap/SID combinations were available, but particular distances were due to the physical room limitations. Purpose: To determine the change of radiation dose to the patient and impact on image quality when the collimation referred to in the professional literature is used for thoracic spine radiography.We were able to show that DRL in combination with cloud computing enables a fast processing of substantial amounts of data, allowing to build up organ-specific databases. Purpose: The annotating process is tedious and time-consuming. Effectively selecting a minimum number of representative unannotated training datasets out of a large-scale heterogeneous dataset is challenging. Our purpose was to identify training datasets iteratively and retrain current model to segment thigh muscle and produce state-of the-art segmentation performance. Methods and materials: IRB-approved 3,000 clinical CT images were used for this study. A 3D-UNet base model, which was previously trained to segment thigh volume into 11 muscle classes by a small cohort of reference datasets, was used. An iterative active learning framework was developed which identified the datasets out of all datasets where base model segmentation prediction had a higher uncertainty in prediction and could produce a positive effect on segmentation accuracy if used for re-training. Identified datasets were further clustered by their similarity features and 10 representative datasets were selected for annotation in each iteration. All re-trained models performance was evaluated by randomly selected 18 test thigh volume datasets. We compared the average surface distance (ASD) as a segmentation performance metric when the base model was re-trained by the same number of randomly chosen datasets. Results: After the second iteration, the evaluation indicates a 53% improvement in median ASD over all muscle class as compared to a 22% increase when retrained with randomly chosen datasets. Paired t-test with a statistical significance score (p < 0.005) shows clear improvement of the segmentation performance. Conclusion: Retraining a base model with the identified datasets by the active learning framework achieved higher segmentation accuracy in comparison to when trained with a randomly selected dataset. To keep the segmentation performance at the expected range for growing datasets, the framework finds the effective training datasets for annotation and reduces unnecessary annotation workload. Purpose: The Research Consortium for Medical Image Analysis (RECOMIA) is a not-for-profit organisation with the objective of promoting research in the fields of artificial intelligence (AI) and medical imaging. RECOMIA aims at minimising the time and effort researchers need to spend on technical aspects such as display and transfer of DICOM images, legal aspects such as de-identification, GDPR, and HIPAA compliance, and quality aspects such as display tools so that medical experts can review and correct AI-segmentations in a cloud-based DICOM-viewer. Methods and materials: Radiologists and nuclear medicine specialists have used the RECOMIA platform to manually annotate up to 100 organs in more than 300 CT studies. Not all organs were annotated in all images; in total, more than 10,000 were annotated. The manual annotations were used to train convolutional neural networks (CNN) to perform automated organ segmentation in CT images. The CT scans were split into training (80%) and validation (20%) groups.In this study, we found that there was a statistically insignificant increase in the ONSD in patients with migraine with aura compared to the patients without aura and also in patients with pulsating pain compared with patients without pulsating pain. We could not find any differences in the transverse diameter, anteroposterior diameter, anterior camera depth, and eye globe volume in patients with and without aura.Limitations: This study is limited by the following: the small number of participants, no control group, no follow-up measurements, and the inclusion of just migraine patients. Purpose: Our goal has been to determine if PEG treatment determined a reduction of pneumonia cases in a population with neurologic functional dysphagia. Methods and materials: 20 patients with neurogenic dysphagia have been retrospectively examined. In 13 PEG-treated patients were evaluate the thorax x-rays and CT to find signs of pneumonia. The observation period is between 500 days before and after the endoscopic surgical procedure. Other seven patients were treated only with rehabilitation; the same evaluation was referred to the radiographic dynamic study of the swallowing (DSS -also called a videofluoroscopic study of the swallowing, VFSS). All 20 patients performed a DSS to confirm or exclude the presence of aspiration, this latter only determining the aspiration nature of pneumonia. The exact Fisher test was applied to each group and subgroup. Results: In the first group analysed of the 13 PEG-treated patients, 7 presented pneumonia before the procedure and the prevalence increased of 8/13 after it, six of whom did not present before. Regarding those ones without aspiration at DSS(low-risk for pneumonia) presented an increase of the cases from 3/8 to 5/8. In the remaining five patients with aspiration (high-risk pneumonia with the burden of aspiration pneumonia defined at DSS) the ratio decreased from 4/5 to 3/5. No significant p-value has merged at the Fisher tests. In the second group of seven patients, who were not treated with PEG the Fisher test on pneumonia cases was not significant as well, but the prevalence of pneumonia was higher than in the other subgroups (6/7).The DSS helped to distinguish patients with aspiration, and therefore with aspiration pneumonia, where the PEG treatment determined a reduction of pneumonia cases. In the other subgroups the prevalence of pneumonia increased. Purpose: To establish the advanced diagnostic protocol of MSCT data postprocessing in patients with orbital trauma in order to select the correct treatment tactics and provide optimal preoperative planning. Methods and materials: A total of 107 patients with orbital trauma (100%) were admitted to the hospital on the 1-2 day after the injury. MSCT was performed using Canon Aquilion One 640, data postprocessing was performed using workstation Vitrea Core. The analysis of MSCT data included standard visualisation of bone and soft tissue injury of orbital structures as well as developed techniques including orbital volume measurements, evaluation of inferior orbital wall defects, analysis of globe position and assessment of periorbital soft tissue density. Results: Postprocessing of MSCT data according to the developed techniques compared to the standard visualisation of bone and soft tissue injury allowed to reveal additional increased traumatic orbital volume in 21 patients (19%); additional enophthalmos in 9 patients (8%); determination of 4 types of inferior orbital wall defects: small inferior orbital defects (n=18; 17%), moderate defects (n=31; 29%), severe defects (n=37; 35%) and total defects (n=20; 19%) as well as detailed assessment of periorbital soft tissue density: oedema (n=60; 56%), haematoma (n=10; 9%), atrophy (n=28; 27%), no changes (n=9; 8%), р<.001.The advanced techniques of orbital volume measurements, inferior orbital wall defects evaluation, analysis of globe position and assessment of periorbital soft tissue density statistically significantly increased the efficiency of MSCT data analysis in patients with orbital trauma in order to define the correct treatment tactics. The CSA of the median nerve at the wrist and forearm in the Asian population is relatively smaller compared to other populations worldwide. This further enforces the idea to define normal reference range for CSA of the median nerve by obtaining normative data for our population. Limitations: Only Pakistani asymptomatic adults included. Results should be correlated with other available Asian population data as well as data available worldwide for better reference range determination. Ethics committee approval: Approved by our institutional review board. Purpose: Computed tomography (CT) features are the reference standard in evaluating the ossification process of the medial clavicular epiphysis for forensic age diagnostics in adolescents and young adults. Consequently, the highest efforts on radiation reduction are warranted. Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate the feasibility of low-dose CT of the clavicula for age estimation. Methods and materials: 207 non-contrast chest CT of 144 patients born between 1988-2012, performed in 2018 due to various clinical indications, were included in this retrospective study. The mean patient age was 16.9±6.6 years. Patients were divided into a low-dose (LD; n=146) and high-dose (HD; n=61) group. Image quality and ossification stages (using the 5-stage classification including the subgroups 2a-3c) were assessed by two radiologists independently. Confidence levels were evaluated for subgroups 2a-3c. Radiation dose was determined via dosimetry software. Results: A dose simulation with a z-axis reduction to depict the clavicula only resulted in a median exposure of 0.1 mSv (IQR: 0.0) in LD compared to 0.9 mSv (IQR: 0.6) in HD (p<0.001). The median image quality was rated significantly worse in LD compared to HD with a median of 3 (IQR: 1) versus 4 (IQR: 0) by both readers on a Likert-scale ranging from 1-4 (p<0.001 for both readers). There was an almost perfect agreement for the ossification stages between both readers with a Cohen's kappa of 0.83 (p<0.001). Median confidence levels of both readers were not significantly different between LD and HD (reader 1: p=0.186; reader 2: p=0.074). Conclusion: Low-dose CT of the clavicula for age estimation is possible without a loss of confidence. Purpose: To investigate differences in perfusion-MRI parameters between healthy and pathologic regions in patients with a histologically confirmed medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw (MRONJ). Methods and materials: in a retrospective analysis, standard parameters of dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE) perfusion MRI of 22 patients, who received the examinations as part of a dedicated clinical MRI protocol for MRONJ assessment, were evaluated. Same sized regions of interest were placed into a representative bone of defined regions. All regions were assessed qualitatively by a blinded expert radiologist as ground truth (4-point Likert-scale; normal, mildsevere changes). Furthermore, histologic confirmation was present for the resected regions.The calculated ratios provide additional value in the differentiation of diseases with increased myocardial mass. As there is no need for additional sequences, time, or even contrast agents, strain ratios have the potential to be a powerful addition into currently developing multiparametric native diagnostic approaches. Our study suggests the utility of systematic use of T1 and T2 mapping sequences and feature tracking analysis in CMR as an integral part of the diagnosis and management of myocarditis identifies potentially high-risk patients with latent ventricular dysfunction. Limitations: In our institution, reference values of T1 and T2 mapping aren't yet available. A higher prevalence of susceptibility artefacts in the inferolateral region was observed. Endomyocardial biopsy was performed only in one case of myocarditis. The small sample of patients enrolled may have influenced the results we obtained. Ethics committee approval: n/a Funding: No funding was received for this work. ). TRO-CT identified 19 (32%) obstructive CAD, 1 (1%) acute aortic syndrome, 5 (8%) PE, 1 (1%) CAD+PE, and 1 (1%) CAD+acute aortic syndrome. LIE acquisition was performed in the remaining 33 (55%) TRO-negative patients. 2 (3%) had LIE with ischemic pattern, 16 (27%) LIE with non-ischemic pattern [13 (22%) myocarditis, 3 (5%) idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy], 3 (5%) increased ECV suggestive for amyloidosis, 2 (3%) cardiac metastasis, 2 (3%) tako-tsubo cardiomyopathy, 1 (1%) pericarditis, and 1 (1%) basal hyperdensity of myocardium suggestive for haemosiderosis. 6 (10%) patients were negative to TRO and LIE and did not report major cardiovascular adverse events after a mean follow-up of 419 days. Conclusion: LIE acquisition increases the diagnostic value of TRO-CT, finding a diagnosis in 82% of TRO-negative patients and allowing a safe discharge of TRO-and LIE-negative patients.Limitations: A single-centre study, small sample size, and short follow-up. Ethics committee approval: The study was approved by the institutional review board. Purpose: This is the first prospective study evaluating if the presence of pericardial effusion (PE) is associated with increased cardiac mortality in thalassemia major (TM). Methods and materials: 1,259 patients (648 females, 31.02±8.64 years) enrolled in the MIOT were prospectively followed from their first CMR scan. CMR was used to quantify myocardial iron overload (MIO) by a multislice T2* approach and to assess biventricular function parameters and PE by cine sequences. Purpose: To evaluate the efficacy of high-resolution ultrasonography (HRUS) in the diagnosis of periapical lesions. Conventionally, the diagnosis of periapical lesions of the teeth has been based on clinical, radiological, and histopathological examinations. However, conventional radiological procedures do not allow for the differentiation between cystic and non-cystic periapical lesions. Recently, USG has been used to provide more detailed information.The fully automatic pipeline is tested on 9 clinical cases with real pacemakers, whereby ECG-gated, as well as ungated contrast-enhanced CT, scan types are included. Significant metal artefact reduction is achieved. Limitations: While empirical evaluation was restricted to pacemaker leads, applicability to other metal implants is very likely. Ethics committee approval: n/a Funding: No funding was received for this work. 

RPS 1007-5

The accuracy of the characterisation of adnexal masses with noncontrast pelvic MRI: an 11-year experience from a tertiary referral centre in the United Kingdom Ş 

RPS 1002a-10

Contrast-enhanced spectral mammography with a compact synchrotron source 

RPS 1013-9

Orientation-resolved means of diffusivities and transverse relaxation times in heterogeneous brain tissue 

RPS 1012a-9

The presence of globally-decreased perfusion on post-reduction MRI does not reliably predict proximal femoral growth disturbance at midterm follow-up in developmental dysplasia of the hip 

RPS 1012a-11

Single fast high-resolution 3D T1 VIBE FS MR sequence versus CT in the evaluation of tarsal coalition in children and adolescents: a reliable radiation-free alternative? 

RPS 1001a-4

Relative enhancement of the liver during hepatobiliary phase after Gd-BOPTA administration: correlation with bilirubin levels and renal function 

RPS 1002b-4

Role of contrast-enhanced imaging in the management of lesions of uncertain malignant potential (B3) 

RPS 1009b-5

The predictive role of the lumbar disc FA (fractional anisotropy) map in diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) to select patients with low back pain who may benefit from intradiscal oxygen-ozone injections 

RPS 1011b-3

Radiomics analysis of enhancing residual tumours better predicts survival in post-surgery MRI patients with brain glioblastomas 

RPS 1011b-5

Between and within rater agreement in white matter hyperintensity segmentation from manual rating and a supervised automated classifier (FSL-BIANCA)

RPS 1011b-10

The added diagnostic value of a model-based reconstruction algorithm in detecting acute trauma-related lesions in brain CT examinations in an emergency setting 

RPS 1001c-12

Distinguishing benign from malignant focal liver lesions (FLL) using the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC): impact of post-processing on the diagnostic accuracy? 

RPS 1010b-6

Improved performance of orthopaedic metal artefact reduction in virtual mono-energetic spectral images compared to conventional polyenergetic images: a total hip arthroplasty phantom study 

RPS 1010b-9

Quantification of metal artefact reduction of various MRI techniques in 10 common total hip arthroplasty implants: when less is more! 

RPS 1005b-3

Machine learning-based assistance to context-sensitively suggest ASPECT score during the reporting of neuroradiological emergencies 

RPS 1005b-9

Validation of a high precision semantic search tool using a curated dataset containing related and unrelated reports of clinically relevant search terms 

RPS 1005b-11

Natural language processing enables a correlation of clinical information with positive findings in low-dose computed tomography in patients with suspected urolithiasis 

RPS 1003b-12

Imaging of the left atrial appendage prior to occluder device placement: introduction of a new single-contrast bolus dual-phase protocol adapted to spectral-detector CT 

RPS 1113-10

The small-size detail detection performance of digital breast tomosynthesis, synthetic 2D, and conventional full-field digital mammography images for different mammography systems: a multicentre study 

RPS 1113-11

Image quality evaluation of a new high-resolution 3-D digital breast tomographic (DBT) imaging system 

RPS 1115-6

The incidence of penetrating aortic ulcer (PAU) as a cause for nonaneurysmal rupture of the abdominal aorta: a single-centre experience 

RPS 1111-2

Vascular hyperintensities on a post-contrast 3D fast-spin-echo T1weighted sequence: a sign of poor collateral pathways in sickle-cell disease cerebral vasculopathy? 

RPS 1111-6

The arterial remodelling ratio and normalised wall index of the middle cerebral artery are associated with leptomeningeal collateral status: a study of high-resolution vessel wall imaging 

RPS 1111-14

Quantification of carotid intraplaque haemorrhage: a comparison with manual segmentation and semi-automatic segmentation on magnetisation-prepared rapid acquisition with gradient-echo sequence 

RPS 1101-9

Iodine accumulation in the liver in patients treated with amiodarone can be unmasked using material decomposition from multiphase spectraldetector CT 

RPS 1302-14

Association of retrospective peer review and positive predictive value of magnetic resonance imaging-guided vacuum-assisted needle biopsies of breast 

MyT3 13-11

Calculating the cut-off value of the damping index using the ROC curve to identify Child-Pugh C patients 

RPS 1305-9

First national teleradiology pilot project in the Saudi Ministry of Health 

RPS 1415-6

The safety of a new stent design during magnetic particle imaging and magnetic resonance imaging 

RPS 1415-10

The effectiveness of dual-layer spectral detector CT for reducing the amounts of contrast agents and injection flow rate 

RPS 1415-11

The validation of iodine contrast flow velocity quantification from timeresolved CT-angiography in a flow phantom 

RPS 1405b-12

A comparison between routine and targeted CT-based radiomics classification models for predicting malignant pulmonary nodules 

RPS 1407a

Is there any news in CT protocols for renal masses and stones evaluation? RPS 1407a-1 Substantial radiation dose reduction with consistent image quality using a novel low-dose stone composition protocol 

RPS 1404a-9

The classification of pulmonary nodules by Lung-RADS 1.1: a randomised prospective analysis of four ultra-low dose CT protocols in a lung cancer screening trial 

RPS 1403a-11

The fight between CAD-RADS and the calcium score: who is the winner? 

RPS 1409b-7

Non-contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging for the visualisation and quantification of an endovascular aortic prosthesis, their endoleaks, and aneurysm sacs at 1.5T 

RPS 1411b-10

The effect of different thresholds for CT-perfusion volumetric analysis on estimated ischaemic core and penumbral volumes 

RPS 1411b-11

Virtual monoenergetic dual-energy CT reconstructions at 80 keV are optimal for early stroke detection 

RPS 1416b-11

The diagnostic efficacy of whole-body low-dose CT in the staging of patients with multiple myeloma compared to whole-body magnetic resonance imaging 

RPS 1410b-11

A novel computed tomography-based scoring system of intra-articular mineralisation of the knee: BUCKS (Boston University calcium knee score) 

RPS 1404b-11

Application of the dual-layer spectral detector CT on CTPA with a low dose of iodine contrast agent and low injection rate Purpose: It is known from the literature that anxiety correlates with reduced interhemispheric connectivity on resting-state functional connectivity. The aim of this study is to verify this hypothesis with the connectometry technique.

Results:

The connectometry analysis identified several white matter bundles negatively correlated to STAI-I score for T-threshold=3, in particular at the level of corpus callosum (48% of the total amount of tracts identified). Several properties of the network influenced the network topology analysis. Purpose: Magnetic resonance imaging has great relevance in CNS pathology, mainly thanks to the multiple, excellent contrasts between tissues. Among its limitations stand long scan times and sensitivity to patients' motion. The present work compared conventional MR sequences with three-dimensional SSFP MRfingerprinting (MRF) with spiral projection k-space trajectories. Through such technique, acquisition of quantitative data of T1, T2, and proton density allows for the post-hoc synthesis of conventional qualitative contrasts with reduced motion sensitivity. The aim of this study was to compare MRF with conventional MRI in examining normal and pathological brain structures.The sensitivity of uterine artery Doppler study to detect adverse perinatal outcome was 83% when two Doppler parameters were considered. Conclusion: Assessment of both the uteroplacental circulation and the fetoplacental circulations together is more sensitive to predict a perinatal outcome, than the assessment of each alone. In suspected IUGR, cerebroumbilical ratio (MCA/UA PI) is a better predictor of adverse perinatal outcome than an abnormal MCA PI or umbilical artery PI. Best results are obtained when we use MCA/UA PI ratio, rather than PIs of a middle cerebral artery and umbilical artery separately.Limitations: This study is limited by the lack of patient follow-up. Ethics committee approval: Not applicable. symptomatic women in correlation with digital palpation and to define cut-offs for Hiatal dimensions that can predict muscle dysfunction. Methods and materials: This is a prospective study included 73 women with symptoms suggesting PFD. 3D-TPUS, MRI, and digital palpation of levator ani muscle were performed for all patients. Levator hiatal antro-posterior (LHap) diameter and area (LH area) were measured at rest and at maximum muscle contraction.The reduction in LHap diameter and LH area during contraction was significantly less in women with underactive pelvic floor muscle contraction (UpfmC) than those who have a normal pelvic floor muscle contraction (NpfmC) by digital palpation (p <0.001). Statistically significant positive correlations (p <0.001) were found between Modified Oxford Score (MOS) and 3D-TPUS and MRI regarding the reduction in the LHap diameter (r= 0.8, 0.82, respectively) and LH area (r= 0.6, 0.7, respectively). A reduction in LHap <6.5% on 3D-TPUS and <7.6% on MRI, predicted UpfmC with sensitivities of 46% and 83%, respectively. A reduction in LH area <3.4% on 3D-TPUS and <3.8% on MRI predicted UpfmC with sensitivities of 75% and 88.5%, respectively. MRI was more sensitive in detecting levator avulsion (63%) than 3D-TPUS (27%). show a progression disease hard to predict with common prognosis factors. We know the gradual expansion of the cysts increases the renal volume. A prognostic classification based on the renal volume measured with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) corrected for height and age (HtTKV, height-adjusted total kidney volume) was developed. The proposed classification defines 5 classes (from A to E) of patients with a different risk of GFR decline based on renal growth rate and annual GFR reduction. Methods and materials: 25 patients (age 24-57) with ADPKD (14F / 11M) were followed clinically and radiologically with abdominal MRI (GE 1.5T, T1, T2, DWI). The MRI was used to calculate HtTKV. The renal volume was calculated by the Mayo clinic's web-based programme and MRI images by an algorithm based on the ellipsoid equation (π / 6xLxWxD), 4 major measurements (L,W,D,coronal, sagittal ,axial sequences), then correlating these values to the patient's age and height, GFR, we obtained the patient class. Results: The GFR range was (12-128) and the HtTKV (230 and 2078 mL/m). The patients were divided in 5 classes (4 class A, 7 B, 6 C, 5 D, 3 E). Patients in class A had normal value, 1/7 class B (GFR <60 ml / min / 1.73m2), class C: 4/6 (GFR <60 ml / min / 1.73m2).The bladder can be approached by many modalities. Ultrasound provides anatomic detail, vascularity and nodules identification. CT is the next step and the gold standard with uro-CT the most commonly used protocol. The six points were defined: (1) imaging findings, (2) ureterovesical junction (UVJ) permeability, (3) bladder wall thickness, (4) presence of nodules/masses, (5) neurogenic bladder, (6) pelvic masses and other findings. The imaging findings included: ultrasound a wall focal (nodule) or diffuse parietal thickening, vascularity; CT -diffuse or nodular parietal thickening with enhancement. 53% of patients had pathology of the UVJ including lithiasis, masses and compression. Bladder wall thickness was defined as pathologic superior to 3mm when distended and superior to 5. Nodules/ masses from the bladder where found in 13 %, from the ureter in 4 % and form the prostate in 3 % of cases, adnexal masses and uterine masses in 12 %. Signs of the neurogenic bladder were present in 64 % of cases and graded from mild to moderate and advanced.Other findings included lithiasis, other urothelial cancers, and intestinal pathology. Conclusion: Bladder pathology is a common problem for radiologists and careful attention and awareness are a demand.Limitations: This study is limited by one-radiologist read and its limited sample. Purpose: Acute glomerulonephritis is an entity of renal disease in which immunologic mechanism cause damage to the basement membrane. The current study evaluates the renal vascular resistance in patients with acute glomerular diseases by measuring main renal and intrarenal arterial resistance (upper, mid and lower polar) (RI) of both kidneys and to correlate with laboratory data (creatinine, proteinuria) and histopathology.The mean RI of either main renal or parenchymal arteries is elevated in tubulointerstitial affection (mean value in main renal = 0.65, mean value in parenchymal arteries = 0.62 ) when compared to mean RI in cases without tubulointerstitial affection (mean value in main renal arteries = 0.59, mean value in parenchymal arteries = 0.57). The presence of crescent is not correlated with RI values in main renal and parenchymal arteries, creatinine level is positively correlated (p-value 0.1) with RI of the main renal arteries, no significant statistical correlation between RI indices and proteinuria (albumin /creatinine ratio). Purpose: Vesicoureteral reflux (RVU) is an abnormal condition, in which urine flows backwards from the bladder to the ureters and renal pelvis. If untreated, it may lead to recurrent urinary tract infections (UTIs), reflux nephropathy chronic renal failure. Currently, micturating-cystourethrogram (MCUG) and radionuclidecystogram (RNC) are the most commonly performed techniques for the diagnosis of RVU; both involve exposure to ionising radiations. However, in the last years, cysto-sonography (CSG) has also been introduced in clinical practice. The aim of this study is to prove the non-inferiority of CSG compared to MCUG, through a comparative analysis, in order to start introducing it as first-line technique, to reduce radiation dose. Methods and materials: 97 paediatric patients (49 boys and 48 girls) with UTIs were enrolled in the study. As first, after positioning of a urinary catheter, each patient underwent a CSG by the intravesical introduction of contrast agent (1ml-SonoVue), immediately followed by MCUG with intravesical iodinated-contrastmedium. Passive and active RVU was sought after spontaneous urination or abdominal press operation.The comparison of the results demonstrated a consistent concordance of the findings, further confirming the sensitivity of CSG in the diagnosis of RVU in the paediatric patient. During the ultrasound examination, it was also possible to assess the renal parenchyma and the possible dilation of the calicopyelic system as further findings useful for the purposes of the diagnostic classification of the patient. Conclusion: Cystosonography is a sensitive diagnostic technique that allows to identify RVU and to evaluate possible morphological alterations of the renal parenchyma avoiding the use of ionising radiation. Limitations: The limitation of this study are that it is a single centre study and that it refers to a short period of time. Kruskall-Wallis tests showed statistically significant differences between transverse and sagittal tumour diameter, tumour volume, cava-and aorta-tumour contact angle and contact length (in cm) (p<0.005). Outstanding discrimination (>0.9) was found for cavatumour contact angle. The optimal cut-off of 5 cm for transverse tumour diameter was confirmed (SENS 0.75 and 1-SPEC 0.18, CI95% 0.8-1). Cava-tumour contact angle had SENS 0.93 and 1-SPEC 0.17 with a cut-off of 98° (CI95% 0.9-1). At MVA aorta-(cut-off 64°) and cava-tumour contact angle (cut-off 98°) and poor IGCCCG score represented the three most important predictors of MVS (p<0.05). The model constructed has a PPV 100%, NPV 87% and an accuracy of 88%. Conclusion: Presence of aorta-tumour contact angle >64°, cava-tumour contact angle >98° on CT scans and poor IGCCCG score identify correctly 9 out of 10 patients requiring MVS at the time of PC-RPLND. These patients may be referred to specialised centres capable to adequately perform this multidisciplinary surgery. Purpose: To compare 3D PD fat-suppressed space turbo spin-echo (TSE) and conventional 2D PD sequences at 3T MRI in the detection of meniscal tears. Methods and materials: Dedicated MR knee imaging of 100 sequential patients with suspected meniscal injuries was retrospectively analysed by two independent radiologists in a novel study design using both a 2D PD standard multiplanar TSE MR technique and 3D PD TSE technique. The result was compared to arthroscopic results (arthroscopy was performed after MRI study) which were considered as a gold standard test. We determined the sensitivity, specificity, and interobserver agreement for each sequence.Results: The 3D TSE shows statistically higher sensitivity and specificity (100% and 100%) for the detection of meniscal radial tear compared to the 2D sequence (67% and 96%). No significant difference was found between the sensitivity and specificity of both techniques regarding the detection of horizontal, longitudinal, root, flap, and bucket handle tears. There was higher interobserver agreements on 3D TSE SPACE than 2D sequences for radial, root, and bucket handle tears. Conclusion: At 3T MRI, the 3D PD fat-suppressed space turbo spin-echo (TSE) has higher diagnostic performance compared to the routine 2D TSE protocol for the detection of meniscal radial tears and similar results as regarding the other types of tears with the advantage of faster acquisition. Limitations: n/a Ethics committee approval: Written and informed consent was obtained. Purpose: To evaluate the added advantage of shear-wave elastography (SWE) over grey-scale sonography in the diagnosis of plantar fasciitis and to obtain a reproducible and reliable sonoelastographic shear stress cut-off value.The proposed method has been compared to an optimised N4ITK in three experiments. It produces nearly identical results to N4ITK for a benchmark test and similar results in a coefficient of variation, mean absolute error, mean error, and structural similarity for a BrainWeb-based experiment, with an average speedup factor of 137. Different methods performed best for the different investigated tissue types. It was also tested for real cases, often producing more radio realistic bias fields in the cases where N4ITK struggles. Also, no datasets were encountered where the method would not improve image quality. Conclusion: Training a convolutional neural network implicitly, through the relation of the outputs of two similar training samples, is possible, omitting the need for true target data. The achieved model is not only generalised but also achieves comparable accuracy to N4ITK with a significant speedup. In 22 patients, a small local haematoma with a median size of 6 ml without further treatment was observed. 20 patients reported pain within the first hours after the intervention, which was easily treated with metamizole. 1 of those 15 patients with a transhepatic pathway showed an incidental arterioportal fistula in a follow-up CT, which did not require further action. The intervention duration from local anaesthesia to the control scan was a median 16 minutes, with a range of 7-35 minutes, and was well tolerated by the patients. Malignancy was confirmed in 92%. In 2 cases, an adenoma was detected; one lesion showed high FDG-uptake and the other high density on CT. In 2 cases, a definite determination was not possible. Conclusion: CT-guided biopsy of the adrenal gland is a safe, fast, and reliable method to verify and characterise metastases in patients suspected of lung cancer. Pathways, patient positioning, investigator experience, and procedural manoeuvres are essential and will be communicated. Turin/ IT (20027467@studenti.uniupo.it) Purpose: To evaluate the effectiveness and safety of UFE as an alternative to surgery in the treatment of uterine fibromatosis. Methods and materials: 255 patients (aged 26-55) with symptomatic UF, indicated for surgery, followed in our centre (2000) (2001) (2002) (2003) (2004) (2005) (2006) (2007) (2008) (2009) (2010) (2011) (2012) (2013) (2014) , with single or multiple fibroids, and pain and/or functional/compressive disorders underwent embolisation; an injection of PVA particles (150-900 µm) from the distal portion of uterine arteries (ascending section). The primary end-point was a flow-stop distally to the injection site, disappearance of the lesion design, and the preservation of flow in the main trunk of UA. The secondary end-point was the control of pain and functional/compressive disorders during follow-up (2-7 years).The procedure was performed bilaterally in 250 patients (98%). The mean duration was 47 min (average fluoroscopy: 10-50 min). Post-embolisation pelvic pain (according to a VAS score) was on average 2.2 at discharge (24h). Follow-up at 2 years showed a resolution of menstrual disorders in 78% of patients and improvement in 14%, pain disappeared in 66%, significant improvement of menstrual flow and HCT/HB levels, and adecrease in total uterine (57.7%)/dominant fibroid (76.1%) volume. There was recurrence in 18 patients. Purpose: To analyse pre-UAE MR images with a view to predicting migration of intramural fibroids post-UAE to better advise patients of the procedural risks.The moderate reduction of leiomyoma size was observed one month after UAE. The reduction of fibroid size after 1 month was 18.4% by US and 17.3% by MRI, after 3 months was 40.7% by US and 42.9% by MRI, after 6 months was 60.4% by US and 61.8% by MRI, after 12 months was 72.5% by US and 74.7% by MRI, and after 24 months was 70.8% by US and 72.2% by MRI. Doppler US-control showed a blood flow decrease during the first month after UAE; in 3 months, blood flow data was restored in uterine arteries. We also noticed a significant reduction or disappearance of clinical symptoms such as pain, menorrhagia, and pressure symptoms. The partial vascularisation of leiomyoma was only detected in one case 24 months after UAE. Conclusion: UAE is an effective, minimal-invasive form of leiomyoma treatment. MRI and US are the modalities that can accurately estimate fibroid changes and blood flow in uterine arteries. The tendency of fibroid shrinkage after UAE is well-defined in the period from 1-24 months. After UAE, the blood supply of myometrium is restored according to US Doppler data in the period from 1-3 months. Limitations: n/a Ethics committee approval: n/a Funding: No funding was received for this work. Purpose: Cryoprobe removal before sufficient thawing may lead to tissue injury and bleeding. We analysed the melting time of radiographic ice-balls during thawing in renal cryoablation by using ultrasound (US) examination.The median radiographic ice-ball volume was 30.3 cm 3 (range, 21.0-62.8 cm 3 ). The median melting time of radiographic ice-balls on US was 13 and 14 minutes for radiologist 1 and 2 (range, 9-15 minutes for both radiologists) (p> 0.05). A positive correlation was found between melting time and radiographic ice-ball volume (Spearman's rho, 0.647 and 0.484 for radiologist 1 and 2). Perirenal haematomas of ≥1cm in thickness were seen in two patients (7.4%).No patient required treatment for the bleeding. The median decrease of serum Hb was 0.3 g/dl. Conclusion: Ice-balls of renal cryoablation may require 15 minutes for complete melting, which may be considered as the optimal time for cryoprobe removal.Limitations: A small, single-institution study. Ethics committee approval: n/a Funding: No funding was received for this work. Author Disclosures: M. J. Kim: nothing to disclose S. Y. Park: nothing to disclose Purpose: To evaluate the therapeutic success, complications, and economic impact of transperineal US-guided focal laser ablation by US/MRI fusion software as a primary treatment for focal unilateral prostate cancer. Methods and materials: 24 patients with newly diagnosed, histopathologicallyproven, focal unilateral prostate cancer were treated with US-guided transperineal focal laser ablation as a primary treatment. The inclusion criteria were no previous prostate treatment, a PSA level ≤20, a Gleason score ≤7, and stage ≤ T2b N0M0 with 3T multi-parametric MRI-visible index lesion (PIRADS ≥ 4). After the ablation, a 3T mpMRI of the prostate was obtained. Follow-up consisted of mpMRI at 1, 3, 6, and 12 months and a US/MRI fusion-guided biopsy at 6 and 12 months. Results: 24 patients were successfully treated with transperineal US-guided focal laser ablation. No complications occurred. The IPSS and SHIM did not significantly change after treatment. The mean operation time was 38.2 minutes (range 32.6-42.5), the mean ablation time was 21.7 minutes (range 18.3-26.8), the mean energy deployed was 3606J (range 3212-3804), the mean hospital stay was 113 minutes (range 55-178), and the mean catheterisation time was 261 minutes (range 95-412). At the 6-and 12-month follow-up, prostate mpMRI and US/MRI fusion-guided biopsy showed neither evidence of local residual disease nor recurrence. Conclusion: Transperineal US-guided focal laser ablation as a primary treatment for prostate cancer has shown encouraging results. Ten-year followup with an international registry is intended to confirm oncological long-term prostate cancer with index lesion control.Limitations: A small number of treated patients, short follow-up, and our first experience with this technique. Ethics committee approval: Protocol approved by the ethical committee of Policlinico Tor Vergata (Rome). Purpose: To evaluate our decision-making between RFA and CA based on tumour size, central position, and nearness to the collecting system on technical efficacy and oncologic outcomes for cT1 RCC. Methods and materials: All cT1 RCC from 2005-2019 were included. Patients treated before 2013 were included in the RFA group and patients treated after 2013 were included in the CA or RFA group, where CA was performed for large (≧35 mm) central tumours or RCC with a nearness to the collecting system, while RFA was performed for smaller (<35 mm) and non-central RCC. The IPTW based on clinical and tumour features was applied. The primary success was compared using logistic regression, while local recurrence-free survival was compared using Cox proportional hazards regression. Clavien complications and the change in renal function (MDRD) were also evaluated. Results: Data from 408 patients were analysed. The primary success rate was higher in the CA or RFA group compared to the RFA group (97.1% vs 87.1%, p<0.001). Local recurrence-free survival was better in the CA or RFA group compared to the RFA group (HR=0.49; 95%CI: 0.28-0.84; p=0.01). Survival without metastases was not different (p=0.65). The incidence of Clavien grade ≥2 adverse events (p=0.30) and the change of renal function (p=0.35) was similar. Conclusion: Our decision-making between CA and RFA achieved a better primary success rate and local recurrence-free survival compared to RFA alone, with excellent oncologic outcomes for RFA in selected patients and also for large and central RCC mainly treated with CA. Limitations: The retrospective design. Ethics committee approval: Institutional review board approval was obtained to review the medical records of patients who underwent ablation of RCC at Necker University Hospital. The VG paradigm was more accurate than the VF paradigm or combination of the two and was therefore selected for further analyses. Some of the networks labelled as language networks by the software were considered inappropriate and discarded by the experimenters. There was a poor overlap between resting-state and task-related areas of activation as assessed by calculating the Dice similarity coefficients (mean:Saturday Scientific Programme 0.1815) using the masks from the VG task GLM analysis, and the selected resting-state components. The laterality index (LI) values of resting-state networks were significantly lower (mean: -0.0165) than the LI of the VG task map (0.4846).The balanced accuracy of the correct classification of MOH and controls was 72.03% for smReHo (p<0.001 during 1,000 permutation testing). Areas contributing to classification accuracy mainly included in right Heschl's gyrus (3.23%), left temporal pole, and right inferior temporal gyrus. The direct comparison showed that MOH patients had significantly decreased smReHo activation in the right Heschl's gyrus (p<0.05, FDR corrected), which was corresponding to the highest weight area by machine learning classifier. A negative correlation was observed between the duration of medication intake and smReHo activation in the right Heschl's gyrus (r=-0.433, p<0.05). Conclusion: With machine learning computational analyses, our study was able to diagnose MOH patients on a single subject level by demonstrating decreased regional function in MOH patients, notably involving the right Heschl's gyrus, suggesting the right Heschl's gyrus might play an important role in the pathogenesis of MOH. Limitations: Studies with larger samples may be required for further verification. Ethics committee approval: n/a Funding: No funding was received for this work.Author Disclosures: C. Yang: nothing to disclose L. Yao: nothing to disclose S. Lui: nothing to discloseThe functional networks were arranged into DMN, auditory network (AUD), visual network (VIS), and ventral attention network (VAN). Dynamic analysis suggested 4 distinct connectivity 'states' across the entire group (state I for 24%, state II for 16%, state III for 35%, and state IV for 25%) and a larger proportion of state III and a smaller proportion of state IV were observed compared with HC group (p=0.0000 and p=0.0058, respectively). Furthermore, the TN group showed decreased connections between networks (DMN-VIS, AUD-VIS, and VIS-VAN). Our analyses showed that increased dwell time in the state IV was associated with the presence of pain in TN. Conclusion: Our study indicates that chronic pain in TN is characterised by altered temporal properties in dynamic connectivity. Further studies on dynamic functional connectivity could help to better understand the progressive dysfunction of networks in TN.Limitations: Correlation analysis is in progress. Ethics committee approval: n/a Funding: No funding was received for this work. Purpose: Diffuse low-grade gliomas (DLGG) have a slow infiltrating character, allowing for simultaneous plasticity and maintaining the patients' functional capacity. Here we addressed whether and how anatomical disconnection following left-hemispheric DLGG growth and resection interferes with restingstate connectivity, specifically in relation to language. Methods and materials: 39 native French persons with a left DLGG were included and underwent awake surgical resection of the tumour. The anatomical disconnectivity risk following the DLGG volume and the resection, and the functional connectivity of resting-state fMRI images in relation to language, were evaluated prior to and three months after surgery. Resting-state connectivity B A C 604 Saturday Scientific Programme patterns were compared with 19 healthy controls. Language was assessed with a picture-naming task. Results: Adaptive plasticity was observed in regions around the tumour/cavitas area, with increased connectivity of the left and right inferior parietal lobule with the left inferior temporal gyrus. Picture naming was surprisingly not dependent on the connectivity of the language network, but of the connectivity of regions know to be involved in semantics, in which their specific role could be explained in the light of the broader resting-state network they took part in. Also, the recruitment of the frontoparietal attention network was observed. Conclusion: A whole-brain approach with specific clinical data input is required for meaningful resting-state analysis in case of lesions. Pre-surgical local plasticity and functional compensation by increased task-directed attention allow a relative high level of performance maintenance after DLGG resection. Limitations: All participants underwent intensive speech-language rehabilitation post-surgery, which might have trained and strengthened attentional resources. Purpose: There have been accumulating studies demonstrating thalamic related structural, functional, and metabolic abnormalities in minimal hepatic encephalopathy (MHE). We conducted the first study to investigate thalamicrelated structural connectivity alterations in MHE. Methods and materials: Diffusion based probabilistic tractography was used to determine the structural connection between the thalamus and the cortical/subcortical regions in 22 cirrhotic patients with MHE, 30 cirrhotic patients without MHE (NHE), and 30 healthy controls. DTI (diffusion tensor imaging) measurements of these thalamic connections, including connectivity strength (CS), fractional anisotropy (FA), mean diffusivity (MD), axial diffusivity (AD), and radial diffusivity (RD), were calculated and compared across three groups. Neuropsychological assessment was performed as well. The correlation analysis was conducted to investigate the relationship between neuropsychological performance and the measurements about thalamic connections. Machine-learning classification analysis was performed to estimate whether diffusion measurements can distinguish MHE from NHE. Results: The probabilistic tractography revealed thalamic structural connection, which was disturbed in cirrhotic patients (reflected by decreased CS/FA and increased MD/AD/RD). Abnormal thalamic connection primarily involved the prefrontal cortex, sensorimotor cortex, parietal cortex, medial temporal cortex, hippocampus, and striatum. Thalamic connectivity abnormalities deteriorated from NHE to MHE and correlated with patients' impaired neuropsychological performance. The relatively high classification accuracy was obtained using CS as a discriminating index. Conclusion: Our results demonstrated the altered thalamic structural connectivity with both cortical and subcortical regions in MHE. The disturbed thalamic connectivity may underlie the mechanism about cognitive deficits in MHE and can serve as biomarker for the diagnosis of MHE and monitoring disease progression. Purpose: Constant stimulation of the nervous system is one of the most popular ways to activate neural networks in order to activate the brain and initiate neuroplasticity processes. The purpose of the study was to evaluate the impact of translingual neurostimulation of the brain to balance, coordination of movement, and the ability to form new motor skills in children with cerebral palsy in the late residual stage.The connectometry analysis identified several white matter bundles negatively correlated to the W-H score for T-threshold=2 and 3. Several properties of the network were influenced in the network topology analysis.The sensitivity of non-gated calcium scoring compared to the standard technique was 95%, specificity -99%. The proportion of "zero" calcium score values in our study was 31% (79 patients). The inter-technique concordance was quite high, both with the inclusion of "zero" values (r=0.981, p<0.05) and without them (r=0.978, p<0.05). The inter-observer agreement was 0.998. The intertechnique agreement in the stratification of patients into the five risk groups according to the calcium score values was also high: k = 0.846. Effective radiation dose in low-dose chest CT was significantly lower than in the case of gated calcium scoring (0.96 ± 0.26 vs 1.51 ± 0.22 mSv, p<0.01).The algorithm calculated organ volumes for the liver, spleen, and right and left kidney (mean volumes in mL: 1868.6, 350.19, 186.30, and 181.91, respectively) , and for the right and left lung (2363.1 and 1950.9) . We found no significant effects of the variable contrast phase or the variable slice thickness on the organ volumes. The mean computational time per case was 10 seconds. The total computational time for all volumes was 1 hour and 11 minutes.The CNN-based segmentations were compared to the manual segmentations of the validation group. There was agreement on 93.7% of the manually-labelled pixels. Conversely, there was agreement on 94.7% of the automatically-labelled pixels. The pixels considered background both manually and by the CNN are not included in these numbers. The run-time of the CNNs was about 2 minutes on a desktop computer. Conclusion: AI-based tools can provide highly accurate and reproducible organ segmentation, similar to those obtained manually by radiologists, but much faster. We continue to train new CNNs to continuously improve performance. Purpose: To create a general methodology of the generation of databases for machine learning algorithms Methods and materials: 450 anonymised chest CTs were included in the dataset. The RadiAnt DICOM Viewer has been chosen for modifying and dealing with the dataset. The prepared dataset was archived on the server of the oncological centre before the morphological diagnostics. Then the data was anonymised with the DicomCleaner™, renaming them with a special code. We used nodule's shape, internal, and external structure as a feature and represented them into histograms for radiomix. After the morphologic confirmation, we assigned some class label to each case. Results: We created the database LIRA (Lung Image Resource Annotated) for the development and testing of CAD. All cases were confirmed morphologically. In our study, 65% of LCs had a typical CT, 26% of CT images corresponded to different diseases which require an additional differential diagnostic criteria, and 9% of LC cases were extremely difficult to recognise by means of CT due to an atypical visualisation image. Class labels for subsets were "typical LC", "atypical", and "not cancer". Conclusion: One of the conditions for successfully using the medical CAD systems is a correctly created database which corresponds with clinical and radiological interpretation. We would like to point out that the main proposed idea of the methodology of creating the medical databases can be formulated as follows: structurisation of the data, their homogenisation and verification of diseases, and the inclusion of the "atypical" cases and cases which look similar to studying disease. The dataset LIRA contains class labels for each nodule to develop the differential diagnostic intellectual algorithm. CT lung (open dataset). Methods and materials: 95 patients (65 training and 30 validation cohorts) who had undergone pre-treatment 18F-FDG-PET studies were included and classified as those who achieved complete pathological response (pCR) and those who did not. The primary tumours were segmented using a fixed threshold approach, radiomic features were extracted, features were annotated according to the international biomarker standardisation initiative. Feature reduction with the minimum redundancy maximum relevance method was performed. Logistical regression and random forest models for clinical outcomes were constructed and compared using ROC curves, decision curves, and McNemar's test.Of the 5 feature sets tested, AUC values for the two models ranged between 0.6 and 0.87. Reduced feature sets did not have much overlap (10-25%) and showed substantial differences in their ability to predict outcomes with our models and datasets. A combined superset showed the best performance (AUC 0.87) but did not show much reduction in feature correlation. Conclusion: High-dimensional data requires extensive feature reduction and increased scrutiny for overfitting, but if a proper methodology is applied, the results of combining multiple feature sets may be beneficial for modelling with radiomics in cancer.The pre-cochlear implant imaging had a sensitivity of 97.22% and diagnostic accuracy of 90% in identifying accessibility of round window when correlating with intra-operative findings. Surgeon acceptability was a highlight of this study. Conclusion: Pre-cochlear implantation imaging in addition to performing the accepted role of imaging of the middle and internal ear anatomy is also crucial in the identification of various non-otologic landmarks which affect procedure planning and possible complications. Attention to these small but significant details can greatly improve surgical outcome. Limitations: There is possibility that changes could have happened in the period between imaging and surgery which was appreciated in surgery and was absent during imaging. Ethics committee approval: n/ Purpose: Artefacts of contrast agent in the subclavian vein often affect the display of cervical arteries at the corresponding level. We aimed to evaluate the effects of noise-optimised virtual monoenergetic imaging (VMI+) reconstructions on reducing these artefacts, compared to traditional virtual monoenergetic imaging (VMI) and linearly blended (F_0.6) reconstructions in patients underwent carotid CTA and recommend a better energy level to show calcified plaque. Methods and materials: Ten patients who underwent carotid CTA were evaluated retrospectively. Images were reconstructed with F_0.6, VMI and VMI+ at 20-keV intervals from 40 keV to 140 keV. Attenuation and noise were measured in the cervical arteries at the worst level obstructed by the contrast agent artefacts of each patient. The artefact index (AI) and iodine SNR were calculated.The AI values for the cervical arteries were lowest in the 140keV VMI+ series, which were lower compared to all the VMI and F_0.6 images (all p<0.029), but showed no significant differences compared to the 120keV VMI+ series (p=0.684). The SNR was highest in the 40keV VMI+ series, and there were no significant differences compared to the highest SNR in the VMI images and F_0.6 (P≥0.529), even compared to the 60-120keV VMI+ (p≥0.052).Purpose: ONSD (optic nerve sheath diameter) measured by ultrasonography would be different in patients with migraine with aura than in patients with migraine without aura. Methods and materials: 49 patients were enrolled. Patients were excluded from the study if they were haemodynamically unstable, needed emergency intervention, had an anatomical eye abnormality, had an eye disease that increased the ONSD or had a headache secondary to organic disease. Patients were assessed for headache type according to the criteria determined by the International Headache Society (IHS). The Siemens Acuson P500 portable ultrasound device in ocular imaging mode with a 10-MHz surface tissue probe was used bedside for the evaluation of the ONSD and eye segment diameter. The ONSD was scanned in the sagittal and transverse planes. Additionally, the eye segment diameter measurements were performed on both eyes. All measurements were repeated three times and then the mean value was recorded.Results: There was no significant difference in the eye segment mean diameters between patients with and without pulsating pain (p > 0.05). ThereThe amplitude of the displacement of the ED tendons was statistically significantly higher in JA+ patients than JA-patients and controls in flexion for both readers (p<0.0001) and in extension for one reader (p<0.0048). Ulnar deviation of the ED tendons was statistically significantly more frequent in JA+ patients than in JA-patients and controls in flexion and in extension for both readers (p<0.0001). Conclusion: JA is associated with the abnormal displacement of the ED tendons in flexion and extension. Abnormal displacement of the ED tendons is absent in patients without JA. Limitations: In the absence of anatomical correlation, we are unable to precisely determine the anatomic lesions associated with the instability of the ED tendons. Ethics committee approval: This study was approved by our institutional ethics committee. All study participants provided written informed consent. (valentina.mori@med.uni-duesseldorf.de) Purpose: To assess radiocarpal cartilage after distal radius fracture with intraarticular and extra-articular extension using multiparametric, non-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).The median nerve CSA in our population at the right wrist was 6.8±1.9 mm 2 while at the left wrist was 6.6±1.9 mm 2 . The CSA at the right forearm was 5.3 ± 1.4 mm 2 while at the left forearm was 5.2±1.5 mm 2 (P<0.001). Also, the CSA was relatively larger in males than females.The mean patient age was 75.2 years (+/-9.9; 12 female patients). Wash-in (0.15 vs 0.05) and positive enhancement integral (PEI; 0.17 vs 0.11) values were significantly higher in MRONJ-affected regions than in healthy jaw areas (p<0.05 for both). Furthermore, DCE-parameters partially correlated with qualitative expert ratings (wash-in, PEI, initial area under the curve, all p<0.05). Conclusion: DCE-MRI reveals significantly different bone perfusion in MRONJaffected regions of the mandible and maxilla compared to the healthy jaw. Disease extent according to MRI data was larger than visible necrotic areas during clinical examination and may help to evaluate the severity of this adverse drug effect.Limitations: This is a retrospective single-centre and single-scanner investigation. All perfusion data was retrieved from MRONJ-diagnosed patients.While clinical and radiological assessment did not indicate pathologic alterations in regions defined as healthy, possible subvisual alterations of the healthy jaw may represent a limitation. However, a control-cohort of healthy volunteers was not used for ethical reasons. Ethics committee approval: Written consent by all patients and IRB approval was given. Purpose: Specific personal identification (fingerprint or DNA matching) is strong evidence in forensic examinations but is mostly lost with decomposition. Sutures on skulls are commonly preserved. The morphology of frontonasal sutures varies among individuals and can be clearly demonstrated by three-dimensional CT (3DCT) images using a new rendering technique. Cinematic volume rendering is a new technique which improves the clarity of 3DCT images and can display skull sutures. We asked whether 3DCT images of the frontonasal suture created by the cinematic volume rendering technique can be used as specific personal identification. Methods and materials: CT images of 50 dry skulls were reformatted to 3DCT images by using a cinematic volume rendering technique on a commercially available workstation (syngo.via, version VB20). Photographs of the dry skulls were adjusted by a blurring effect on Photoshop. Four readers (an anatomist, forensic anthropologist, forensic doctor, and radiologist) responded to three questionnaires, firstly matching a 3DCT image with the photographs of dry skulls, secondly determining minimum levels of clarity of the suture on dry skull photographs that they can use for matching, and thirdly determining the level of clarity which 3DCT displayed using photographs of dry skulls as a reference.Results: Correct matching rates were high for all readers (98-100%). The mean values of visual grading analysis scores for clarity of the sutures on 3DCT (63-77%) are higher than that of the minimum level that each reader required for matching (37-50%) (p<0.001, p=0.0039). Conclusion: 3DCT images of the frontonasal suture created by cinematic volume rending can be used for personal identification. If a clinical CT of the skull of a missing person is available, 3DCT images can be later reformatted and used as pre-mortem data. Purpose: To evaluate the accuracy of image-guided localisation and removal of lymph nodes containing known metastases in breast cancer patients treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT). Methods and materials: 64 patients with breast cancer and nodal metastases who underwent NACT between 2017 and 2019 were prospectively enrolled. A clip was placed in the sampled node. After NACT, patients underwent sentinel lymph node (SLN) dissection, removal of the clipped node (CN), and subsequent axillary lymphadenectomy (ALND). Pathological results of SLN and CN were compared to ALND to assess the false-negative rate (FNR). Results: Axillary pathological complete response at ALND was 43,8%. FNR of SLN was 25%, with 9 false-negative (FN) events in 36 patients with residual disease. In 6/9 patients with FN SLNs, the CN contained metastases, resulting in an FNR of 8.3%. Basing on the number of abnormal nodes on initial staging, in patients with 1-3 abnormal nodes (21 patients) residual disease was identified in 10 patients at ALND (47,6%). The SLN didn't reveal metastases in 4/10 patients (FNR=40%) while the CN didn't reveal metastases in 1 patient (FNR=10%). In >4 abnormal nodes (43 patients), the FNRs of SLN and CN were 19,2% and 7,7%, respectively. According to radiological response to NACT, in patients with complete radiological response (cRR) (38 patients), the FNR of SLND was 35.3% (6 FN events in 17 patients with residual disease). In 4/6 patients with FN SLNs, the CN contained metastases, with an FNR of 11,7%. In patients without cRR (26 patients), the FNRs of SLN and CN were 15.8% and 5.3%, respectively. Conclusion: CN could improve accuracy of axillary staging in node-positive patients who received NACT, especially in N1-stage and in patients with cRR. Limitations: Nodal-stage on initial staging. Ethics committee approval: The study was approved by an ethics committee. Purpose: A major role in the diagnosis of myocarditis is played by new CMRbased biomarkers. The aim of the study was to investigate the diagnostic capabilities of tissue-tracking (TT) strain analysis in patients with a CMR-based diagnosis of myocarditis. Methods and materials: 43 patients with a CMR-based diagnosis of myocarditis according to the standard Lake Louise criteria were retrospectively analysed. 27 healthy participants were selected as a control group. Cine-RM data was used for the analysis. Dedicated TT-software was used to perform radial, circumferential, and longitudinal strain for global, per-plane (basal, middle, and apical), and segmental (AHA 16-segments standard) evaluation in short and long-axis left ventricle images. (AUC up to 0.824) . No significant correlations were found with oedema, while a significant correlation was found between segmental radial and LE (p-value:0.019), and an interesting trend between segmental circumferential and LE (p-value:0.087). Conclusion: Tissue-tracking strain analysis has proved accurate in the evaluation of patients diagnosed with myocarditis based on standard Lake Louise criteria. Tissue-tracking strain analysis could improve diagnostic accuracy in clinical practice, adding useful information over the standard findings.The data for supervised learning is generated by introducing synthetic metal implants into the projection data of 14 metal-free clinical cases with desired acquisition settings. A pacemaker lead model ensures sensible insertion positions, pathways, and motion trajectories by taking the cardiac anatomy and concomitant ECG-data into account.

Limitations

Limitations: A small number of subjects, all of which were healthy. Ethics committee approval: The study was approved by the local ethical board. All participants provided written informed consent. Purpose: To explore the potential of superb microvascular imaging (SMI) technology in visualising brain microvessels in preterm neonates of different gestational ages (GA).

A C 585

Saturday Scientific Programme 

B

A C 600 Saturday

RPS 1611-1 16:00

Resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging in predicting the long-term functional outcome after acute ischaemic stroke E. Camacho-Ramos 1 , A. Jimenez-Pastor 1 , C. Biarnés 2 , A. Alberich-Bayarri 1 , S. Pedraza 2 , J. Serena 2 , M. Terceño 2 , Y. Silva 2 , J. Puig 2 ; 1 Valencia/ES, 2

Girona/ES (educamacho@quibim.com)

Purpose: Stroke is one of the main causes of disability in adults. Resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI) is able to map functionalanatomic networks by analysing spontaneously correlated low-frequency activity fluctuations across the brain. However, the role of rs-fMRI to predict the functional outcome after acute stroke remains unclear. We aimed to evaluate the impact of rs-fMRI at 72h after stroke symptoms onset to predict the functional outcome at 1-year follow-up. Methods and materials: 35 reperfused stroke patients (12 female, age: 68±14 years, 3-day national institutes of health stroke scale (NIHSS) score: 6±5) were consecutively scanned 72 hours after symptom onset. A modified Rankin scale (mRS) was used to evaluate functional outcome at 90 days (patients with good functional outcome, mRS ≤2; poor outcome, mRS>2). Image pre-processing included motion and slice-timing correction, outliers' detection, brain tissue segmentation, MNI space normalisation, smoothing, and band-pass filtering to remove undesired components. Region-of-interest analyses were performed to calculate the correlation coefficients for every pairwise region and a weighted general linear model was used to discover significative differences (p<0.05 FWE) between groups. Results: Patients with good outcome presented higher intra-network connectivity, while patients with poor outcome showed lower inter-network connectivity. To predict the 1-year functional outcome after a stroke, the 3-day NIHSS score was the most relevant predictor. An accuracy of 74.3% was obtained through a discriminant model using only clinical scores. Adding anatomical networks increased accuracy to 88.6%, 97.1% (including functional networks), and 100% (with clinical and imaging variables). Conclusion: These results show the relevance of rs-fMRI in the acute phase to predict the long-term functional outcome in stroke patients. Purpose: This study applied brain resting and task state fMRI to detect the changes of brain activity and explore the mechanism of neurological damage in adult patients with common exotropia. Methods and materials: 20 patients (M:10, F:10) and 20 age-and sex-matched controls with normal corrected visual acuity from 18 to 26 years of age were enrolled in this study. Two independent samples t-tests were employed to measure the differences of regional homogeneity (ReHo) and amplitude of lowfrequency fluctuation (ALFF) in the resting-state fMRI and the brain-activity difference in the visual stimuli task fMRI of two groups. Results: Compared with healthy controls, patients had significantly higher ReHo in the right middle occipital gyrus and the left supramarginal gyrus, and lower values in the right cingulate gyrus, the right precentral gyrus, the right superior temporal gyrus, and the left frontal sub-gyral lobe (P<0.05). Patients showed a reduced ALFF in the left superior parietal lobe, the right middle cingulate gyrus, the left anterior cingulate gyrus, and the right inferior temporal gyrus (P<0.05).Moreover, under the condition of binocular 2D visual task stimulus, the brain activity increased in the left superior frontal gyrus, the right superior orbital frontal gyrus, the bilateral inferior orbital frontal gyrus, and the left rectus gyrus in the patient group. Meanwhile, the brain activity of the left postcentral gyrus and the left precuneus gyrus increased under binocular stereo-stimulation. Conclusion: Common exotropia may lead to disorders in the processing of visual-spatial information and the control of emotion and attention. Purpose: Task-based fMRI is the method of choice for determining the hemispheric dominance of language function. One important limitation is that the technique depends on the patient's ability to perform the task. The aim of our study was to test the feasibility of using resting-state fMRI instead of task-based approaches. Methods and materials: 15 healthy native English speakers underwent restingstate fMRI and two language fMRI paradigms: a verbal fluency (VF) and one verb generation (VG). Task-based fMRI was analysed using both a general linear model (GLM) in the SPM software and independent component analysis (ICA). Resting-state fMRI data was analysed by using both ICA and principal component analysis (PCA) using the SPM CONN toolbox, assuming a fixed number of 20 components. Resting-state networks were extracted by using both an automated template procedure and visually by two experts (VL and LM).

RPS 1611-4 16:18

Machine learning analysis in the diagnosis of medication overuse headache: a resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging study C. Yang, L. Yao, S. Lui; Chengdu/CN Purpose: Medication-overuse headache (MOH) is a psychiatric comorbidity associated with chronic migraine. As machine learning is capable of identifying subtle disease patterns on a single subject level, we sought to determine the differences between MOH patients from healthy controls by using a machine learning classifier on resting-state functional MRIs (rs-fMRI). Methods and materials: 34 patients with MOH and 41 age and sex-matched healthy controls were recruited. Smooth mean regional homogeneity (smReHo) was obtained via DPARSFA. Support vector machine (SVMs) algorithms based on PRoNTo toolbox were used to explore the utility for smReHo in the differentiation of patients and controls individually. Finally, Pearson's correlation between the MOH patients and clinical measurement was investigated.

RPS 1611-5 16:24

The reorganisation of language networks after temporal lobe epilepsy surgery: a clinical fMRI study O. Purpose: The reorganisation of language is common in epilepsy patients and a relevant factor in surgical therapy. The non-invasive gold standard in presurgical evaluation is language fMRI. fMRI network analysis could reveal subtle changes in language network architecture so far invisible with standard analyses and thus provide relevant additional information. We aimed to investigate the reorganisation processes of language networks in surgical patients with temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) using standard fMRI activation and recent network analysis. Methods and materials: Task-based language fMRIs were performed on 28 TLE patients (16 right/12 left) before and after surgery, and on 22 healthy controls. FMRI activation analysis, a derived laterality index, and functional connectivity of global and language networks were used to investigate language architecture. Naming, semantic, and phonematic verbal fluency were correlated with imaging parameters. Results: Both left and right TLE were associated with widespread language network alterations, particularly ipsilesional, before, and more pronounced after surgery. Preoperatively, mesiotemporal connectivity was decreased in left TLE, while postoperatively bihemispheric changes with a shift to more atypical language laterality (especially frontal) occurred. In right TLE, right intrahemispheric frontotemporal functional connectivity was attenuated before and further decreased after surgery, while those patients with stronger connectivity scored worse in semantic verbal fluency. Better postoperative naming ability was generally accompanied by stronger interhemispheric frontal connectivity. In all cases, network analysis revealed more widespread alterations than activation analysis.

Limitations:

The predominately left-sided tumour distribution is due to the retrospective design, as included patients had all been selected clinically for presurgical assessment. Results: DSCT and TTE all have high sensitivity and specificity in the diagnosis of intracardiac anomalies and anomalies of great vessels，the difference is not statistically significant (p > 0.05), while the sensitivity of DSCT in diagnosing PA-VSD patients with major aortopulmonary collateral arteries (MAPCAs) was higher than that of TTE (100% vs 68.75%). The incidence of MAPCAs in the group of the large ventricular septal defect (57.7%) is higher than non-large ventricular septal defect group (11.1%) diagnosed by DSCT, the difference is statistically significant(p=0.018, < 0.05. Based on DSCT images, McGoon ratio, Nakata index and TNPAI index of patients were measured. There were significant differences in McGoon ratio and TNPAI index between different treatment groups (p < 0.05). Conclusion: DSCT can accurately diagnose PA-VSD and associated cardiovascular malformations，evaluate the development of pulmonary artery and anatomical characteristics of MAPCAs. It has great reference value for diagnosis and the choice of treatment methods of PA-VSD.Firstly, the sample size of this study is relatively small, which limits the application of the research results. Secondly, because this study is a retrospective study, the surgical methods are affected by the personal habits of the operator partly, which makes the results of the study have certain limitations and need further verification of randomised clinical trials. The feasibility and radiation dose of single-beat coronary CT angiography in patients with atrial fibrillation C. Zhao, Z. Yang; Beijing/ CN (chenglin.zhao@163.com) Purpose: To evaluate the feasibility and radiation dose of single-beat coronary CTA in patients with atrial fibrillation (AF) compared sinus rhythm (SR).The PET dataset is not very large (low incidence and expensive modality) and the event frequency is slightly below 40%. The fixed threshold segmentation may be less accurate for lesion size, but it was chosen to maximise radiomics stability. Ethics committee approval: The study was approved by the local ethics committee in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration and all patient information was anonymised prior to analysis. Purpose: The value proposition of artificial intelligence (AI) solutions in healthcare have been well described and it is apparent that 'narrow AI' will have a role in every stage of the clinical workflow. The deployment of AI solutions in the clinical workflow of a multi-country healthcare organisation has many challenges, but establishing a systematic and unified framework can lead to successful outcomes. By defining measurable performance indicators, it is possible to track in real-time whether actions give benefits to all stakeholders; patients, referrers, and business partners.

Results

Limitations: This study is limited by its small sample size and its retrospective, monocentric nature. Ethics committee approval: Ethics committee approval was obtained. Written informed consent was waived. The effect of non-optimal tube voltage on radiation dose in lumbar spine radiography E. Alukić, N. Mekis; Ljubljana/SI Purpose: To investigate how exposure parameters or, more precisely, the tube voltage affects radiation dose to the patient in lumbar spine imaging.Limitations: A lack of mapping sequence, especially in elderly examination, does not permit an adequate comparison with revisited Lake Louis criteria. Ethics committee approval: The study was conducted in accordance with the declaration of Helsinki. Purpose: The pericoronary fat attenuation index (pFAI) emerged as a marker of coronary artery inflammation (CAI), measurable by standard coronary CT angiography (CCTA). It compares well with the gold standard for the CAI assessment and can predict future cardiovascular events. pFAI could prove invaluable in differentiating CAI from a noninflammatory status, helping to unravel the mechanisms subtending an event classified as myocardial infarction with nonobstructive CA (MINOCA) or Tako-Tsubo syndrome (TTS). Methods and materials: Patients admitted with MINOCA and TTS between 2011-2018, who had both CCTA and cardiac MR during/shortly after the acute phase, were selected and pFAI measured in their CCTA. pFAI was also measured in control subjects who had CCTA for atypical chest pain workup, no obstructive CAD found in their CCTA, and no cardiac events at a 2-year followup. Results: In the n=106 MINOCA/TTS, mean pFAI was 68.378.29 vs. 78.036.20 in the n=106 controls (P<0.0001), and the difference confirmed also when comparing mean pFAI in each CA between MINOCA/TTS and controls (P<0.0001). Nonobstructive coronary plaques at CCTA, high-risk plaques in particular, were more frequently found (P<0.01) in the MINOCA/TTS group versus controls. Conclusion: In MINOCA and TTS pts, CCTA is not only able to detect angiographically invisible atherosclerotic plaques, but its diagnostic yield can be expanded using the simple measurement of pFAI to characterise pericoronary fat tissue. In MINOCA/TTS, mean pFAI demonstrates higher values compared with controls, a finding that has been associated with CAI. Limitations: The drug therapy was not recorded. We cannot exclude an effect of drugs used in acute coronary syndromes on pFAI in our MINOCA/TTS group. To determine the T1-relaxation time differences between chronic myocarditis (CM) and non-ischemic dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) using an overall and segmental approach on native T1 mapping.Limited studies have been done to evaluate periapical lesions using USG with colour Doppler and power Doppler. Methods and materials: 60 patients having inflammatory periapical lesions of maxillary or mandibular anterior teeth and requiring endodontic surgery were included in this study. We used conventional periapical radiographs as well as USG with colour Doppler and power Doppler for the diagnosis of these lesions. Their diagnostic performances were compared against histopathologic examination. 

