INTRODUCTION

Claiming an estimated 1.5 million lives in 2020, tuberculosis (TB) remains one of the leading causes of death globally from an infectious disease (WHO, 2021) . The severe disruptions to health services wrought by the COVID-19 pandemic are predicted to worsen this grim toll by a further 1 million TB deaths per annum over the next four years (WHO, 2021) . In the absence of a highly efficacious vaccine, prolonged chemotherapy with combinations of anti-TB drugs forms the cornerstone of TB control. However, the rise of drug resistance through ongoing evolution and spread of drug-resistant strains of the aetiologic agent, Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), is undermining current efforts. This problem, exacerbated by additional treatment delays caused by the pandemic, underscores the urgent need for new TB drugs with distinct mechanisms of action for inclusion in shorter, safer, and more effective drug regimens.The TB drug discovery and development pipeline established in recent years has begun to deliver new and repurposed drugs and combinations which have revolutionized the treatment of drug-resistant TB (Conradie et al., 2020) , and demonstrated that treatment-shortening is an achievable goal (Dorman et al., 2021) . However, maintaining this momentum requires replenishment of the pipeline with high-quality hit compounds that show mechanistic novelty (Evans and Mizrahi, 2018) . This is a key objective of the Tuberculosis Drug Accelerator (TBDA) (Aldridge et al., 2021) .Of the vital cellular processes targeted by TB drugs in clinical use, DNA replication stands out as relatively under-represented (de Wet et al., 2019; Ditse et al., 2017; Reiche et al., 2017) ; this is despite the high vulnerability of some genes essential for DNA replication in Mtb (Bosch et al., 2021) including those encoding DNA gyrase, the target of the fluoroquinolones, moxifloxacin, gatifloxacin and levofloxacin, and the only DNA metabolic enzyme currently targeted for TB therapy. Fluoroquinolones inhibit DNA gyrase with bactericidal consequences for Mtb (Mayer and Takiff, 2014; Nagaraja et al., 2017) and have been incorporated in secondline therapy for multidrug resistant (MDR) TB (Dawson et al., 2015) and in treatmentshortening regimens for drug-susceptible TB (Dorman et al., 2021) . The identification of novel scaffolds that target DNA gyrase remains an active area of investigation (Das et al., 2019; Johnson et al., 2019) while topisomerase I is also being pursued as a new TB drug target (Godbole et al., 2015) . Recently, the replisomethe macromolecular machine that copies the bacterial chromosomehas emerged as an attractive potential target for TB (Ditse et al., 2017; Reiche et al., 2017) and antibacterial drug discovery, more generally (Kaguni, 2018) . Key 1A) (Cane and Yang, 1985) . Nargenicin is an ether-bridged macrolide antibiotic first isolated from various Nocardia species almost three decades ago (Celmer et al., 1980; Pidot and Rizzacasa, 2020) . It is a narrow-spectrum antimicrobial (Painter et al., 2015) with activity against gram-positive bacteria including methicillin-resistant S. aureus and Micrococcus luteus (Sohng et al., 2008) . The identification of narR/ngnU (Dhakal et al., 2020; Pidot and Rizzacasa, 2020) , a dnaE homologue immediately adjacent to the nargenicin biosynthetic gene cluster in the producer organism, Nocardia sp. CS682 (Dhakal et al., 2019) , suggested a mechanism of self-resistance to nargenicin using NarR/NgnU as a "decoy" (Pidot and Rizzacasa, 2020) .The potent bactericidal activity and low frequency of resistance for nargenicin in S.aureus (Painter et al., 2015) led us to investigate the antimycobacterial properties of this molecule (Young et al., 2017) under the auspices of the TBDA. Here, we show that nargenicin is a bactericidal genotoxin that induces a DNA damage response in Mtb that is accompanied by cellular elongation and potential weakening of the cell envelope. We further demonstrate that the antimycobacterial activity of nargenicin is mediated through inhibition of DNA synthesis, consistent with inhibition of the DNA polymerase activity of purified DnaE1.Structural analysis by cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) revealed a unique mode of binding by nargenicin to Mtb DnaE1 in the presence of DNA in which nargenicin occupies the position of both the incoming nucleotide and templating base and stacks onto the terminal base pair.We show that the antibacterial efficacy of nargenicin as a DNA replication inhibitor is attributable, at least in part, to the DNA binding affinity of the organism's replicative polymerase.

Nargenicin is bactericidal against Mtb in vitro

Nargenicin was shown to have a minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of 12.5 µM againstMtb H37Rv under standard culture conditions (7H9/OADC/Tw) ( Figure 1B ; Table S1 ). In this culture medium, nargenicin showed comparable activity against a range of drug-sensitive and drug-resistant clinical isolates of Mtb and was active against M. smegmatis (Msm). The activity against Mtb diminished significantly when Tween-80 was replaced by Tyloxapol to disperse the mycobacteria. This likely reflects the differential impact of these two detergents on the lipid composition of the cell envelope at the concentrations typically used for clump dispersal (Ortalo-Magne et al., 1996) with Tween-80 increasing permeability to the drug (Tullius et al., 2019) . Nargenicin showed increased potency in GAST/(Fe)/Tween-80. The in vitro selectivity index was reasonable with limited cytotoxicity against the HepG2 cell line (CC50 >100 µM).Time-kill kinetic analysis revealed that nargenicin was bactericidal in Mtb H37Rv, showing time-dependent kill with limited dose dependency over the concentration range tested ( Figure 1C) . To ascertain whether this bactericidal activity was accompanied by cell lysis, we quantified GFP release from H37Rv-GFP (Chengalroyen et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2012) .Nargenicin treatment led to GFP release from day 4 onwards, peaking on day 6-7 ( Figure 1D ).Griselimycin treatment also resulted in delayed GFP release analogous to that elicited by nargenicin, but no release of GFP was observed upon exposure to the DNA gyrase inhibitors, ciprofloxacin or moxifloxacin, demonstrating that the GFP release was not a generic consequence of disrupting DNA metabolism ( Figure 1D ).

Nargenicin inhibits DNA synthesis and is genotoxic in Mtb

To ascertain whether nargenicin shares the same mechanism of action in mycobacteria as in S.aureus (Painter et al., 2015) , we applied a suite of complementary biological profiling assays in Mtb and Msm. Multiple attempts to isolate spontaneous nargenicin-resistant mutants in Mtb or Msm by plating 10 9 -10 10 cells on media containing nargenicin at 5-20 MIC (Mtb) or 1-10 MIC (Msm) were unsuccessful, yielding no heritably resistant mutants. Reasoning that nargenicin would elicit a DNA damage response if it disrupts DNA replication, we used the Mtb PrecA-LUX reporter strain to monitor activity of the DNA-damage-inducible recA promoter in response to drug treatment (Naran et al., 2016) . Like fluoroquinolones and griselimycin, nargenicin triggered dose-dependent induction of luminescence (Figures 2A and   S1 ). Comparative DNA microarray analysis revealed a transcriptomic signature for nargenicintreated Mtb that shared key features with those elicited by mitomycin C and fluoroquinolones ( Figure S2A , S2B and Table S2 ) (Boshoff et al., 2004; Boshoff et al., 2003) . Genome-wide transcriptome analysis by RNA-seq revealed profound upregulation of dnaE2, imuA' and imuB, components of the mycobacterial "mutasome" responsible for DNA damage tolerance and SOS-induced mutagenesis (Boshoff et al., 2003; Warner et al., 2010) , and other DNA repair genes including recA, radA, uvrA, lhr, and adnAB ( Figures 2B; S2C and Data S1).Interestingly, deletion of either recA (Machowski et al., 2007) or dnaE2 (Boshoff et al., 2003; Warner et al., 2010) had a negligible impact on the antimycobacterial activity of nargenicin (Table S1) . Genes most highly downregulated by nargenicin were enriched in those associated with cell division (ftsZ, whiB2 and ripA), and included genes involved in cell envelope biogenesis (e.g., fbpC) (Figures 2B and S2C ).Morphological profiling of Msm exposed to nargenicin revealed a filamentation phenotype with the proportion of elongated bacilli in the population increasing with drug dose ( Figure S3 ). This drug-induced profile clustered closely in UMAP space with those resulting from transcriptional silencing of components of the DNA replication and repair machinery ( Figure 2C ), as previously defined (de Wet et al., 2020) , further implicating disruption of DNA metabolism in the mode of action of nargenicin. Direct evidence for inhibition of DNA replication was then obtained from a macromolecular incorporation assay, which compares incorporation of radiolabeled precursors into total nucleic acid, DNA, protein, peptidoglycan or fatty acid in cells treated with an experimental drug versus controls. Nargenicin had a profound effect on DNA synthesis resulting in 60% and >95% reduction in [ 3 H]-uracil incorporation when used to treat Mtb at 2 and 20 MIC, respectively. In contrast, nargenicin had a limited impact on RNA, protein, peptidoglycan, and fatty acid synthesis ( Figure 2D ).Together, these results were consistent with the replicative polymerase, DnaE1, as the likely target of nargenicin in mycobacteria.To investigate this further, we assessed the impact of modulating the level of dnaE1 expression on susceptibility of mycobacteria to nargenicin. We generated a set of fluorescently labeled Mtb hypomorphs carrying inducible dnaE1 CRISPR interference (Rock et al., 2017) constructs and determined the inhibitory activity of nargenicin against these strains in the presence or absence of the anhydrotetracycline (ATc) inducer. Marked hypersensitization to nargenicin was observed for all four hypomorphs under conditions of dnaE1 silencing (+ATc) but not in the uninduced controls (-ATc) (Figures 3A-C) . Notably, the effect was specific to nargenicin, as evidenced by the lack of effect of dnaE1 silencing on the susceptibility of Mtb to isoniazid or ciprofloxacin, which target mycolic acid biosynthesis and DNA gyrase, respectively ( Figure 3C ). Together, these results identified DnaE1 as a target of nargenicin in Mtb. Interestingly, overexpression of Msm dnaE1 had no effect on the nargenicin susceptibility in Msm or Mtb ( Figure S4 ) suggesting that DnaE1 copy number alone did not determine nargenicin efficacy.

Nargenicin differentially inhibits bacterial polymerases

Based on the microbiological evidence, we investigated whether nargenicin inhibited the DNA polymerase activity of Mtb DnaE1 in a biochemical assay. For comparison, we included S.aureus DnaE, as well as the extensively characterized replicative DNA polymerase from E. coli, DNA polymerase III  (Pol III). To monitor the polymerase activity, we used a real-time polymerase assay in which the incorporation of dGMPs in the primer strand quenches the fluorescent signal of a fluorescein group at the 5' end of the template strand (Rock et al., 2015) .We found that nargenicin also inhibits the activity of Mtb DnaE1, albeit at ~20-fold higher concentrations than S. aureus DnaE (IC50 = 125 nM and 6 nM, respectively) under the conditions of this assay ( Figure 4A) . Surprisingly, the E. coli polymerase was only significantly inhibited by nargenicin at concentrations higher than 10 µM.

Cryo-EM reveals mechanism of inhibition by nargenicin

To elucidate the mechanism of polymerase inhibition, we determined the structure of fulllength Mtb DnaE1 in complex with nargenicin and a DNA substrate by cryo-EM (Figures 4B-F ). The structure was determined to a resolution of 2.9 Å with well-defined density for the polymerase active site, DNA, and the bound nargenicin molecule (Figures 4B-F) . The cryo-EM structure of Mtb DnaE1 is identical to the previously determined crystal structure (Baños-Mateos et al., 2017) with the exception of the oligonucleotide/oligo saccharide binding (OB) domain that was not included in the crystal structure ( Figure S5 ). The OB domain is flexible as it shows a weaker density in the cryo-EM map when compared to the rest of the molecule.The flexibility of the OB domain is consistent with cryo-EM structures of E. coli Pol III that show a 70 Å movement of the OB-domain between the DNA-bound and DNA-free state (Fernandez-Leiro et al., 2015) .The DNA is bound in a canonical manner between the thumb and fingers domains, as was previously observed for other C-family DNA polymerases (Evans et al., 2008; Fernandez-Leiro et al., 2015; Wing et al., 2008) . The nargenicin molecule is bound in the polymerase active site and is sandwiched between the last base pair of the DNA duplex, the first base of the template strand, and the fingers domain of the polymerase ( Figure 4D ). Nargenicin occupies both the position of the incoming nucleotide as well as the template base and thus mimics the position of the newly synthesized base pair ( Figure 4E ). To do so, the first unpaired template base is displaced from its position and bumps into Pro668 of an adjacent helix (residues 668 to 673) that becomes disordered. On the protein side, nargenicin occupies a shallow pocket and only makes three direct contacts with the protein: Arg667 and His787 make a hydrogen bond to two oxygens in nargenicin, while Gln638 makes a hydrogen bond with the nitrogen in the pyrrole ring ( Figure 4F ). The opposite end of nargenicin that is located on top of His787 makes no interaction with the protein as its nearest neighbor is over 5 Å away.The binding of nargenicin is reminiscent of the binding of aphidicolin in human DNA polymerase  (hPol) (Brundret et al., 1972) . Although the two inhibitors are different in structure ( Figure S6A ) and the polymerases belong to different families (hPol is a B-family polymerase, whereas Mtb DnaE1 a C-family polymerase), both inhibitors are bound between the last base pair of the DNA and the polymerase fingers domain, occupy the position of both incoming and templating base, and displace the templating base ( Figure S6B-C) . However, owing to the structural differences in the polymerase active sites, it is unlikely that nargenicin can inhibit the human polymerase as modeling of nargenicin into the hPol structure reveals several clashes with the protein (Figure S6D . The similar mechanism of action of the two inhibitors derived from different organismsaphidocolin is derived from the mold, Cephalosporium aphidicola (Brundret et al., 1972) whereas nargenicin is produced by a Nocardia species (Cane and Yang, 1985; Celmer et al., 1980) is a remarkable case of convergent evolution.

Drug resistance through allostery

The structure described above shows that the DNA forms a crucial part of the nargenicin binding site, agreeing with the previous observation that binding of nargenicin to S. aureus DnaE only occurs in the presence of DNA (Painter et al., 2015) . This DNA dependency of binding may also hold the key to the differences in inhibition between S. aureus DnaE, Mtb DnaE1, and E. coli Pol III ( Figure 5 ). The predicted nargenicin binding sites for S. aureus DnaE and E. coli Pol IIIα are highly similar to those of Mtb DnaE1 (Figures 5A-B ) and the three residues that make a hydrogen bond with nargenicin are conserved in all three species.Hence, the difference in sensitivity does not appear to have its origin in the binding site.Moreover, a mutation in S. aureus DnaE (a serine to leucine mutation at position 765, equivalent to Mtb DnaE1 residue 860) that renders it resistant to nargenicin is located ~30 Å away from nargenicin ( Figure 5C ). This mutation is immediately adjacent to the region of the fingers domain that interact with phosphate backbone of the double-stranded DNA substrate.Therefore, we hypothesized that the potency of nargenicin to inhibit a DNA polymerase may be dictated by the polymerase's affinity for DNA. To test this, we measured the DNA affinity of the three polymerases by fluorescence anisotropy using a primed DNA substrate ( Figure   5D ). The three polymerases show strikingly different dissociation constants of ~ 6 nM for S.aureus DnaE, 250 nM for Mtb DnaE1, and 12 µM for E. coli Pol IIIα. These DNA affinities correlate with the relative sensitivities to nargenicin that follow the same trend ( Figure 4A ).We also tested the resistant mutation in S. aureus DnaE (S765L), which, as predicted, reduced the affinity for DNA approximately 14-fold ( Figure 5D ).Taken together, the data support the notion that the potential of nargenicin to inhibit a DNA polymerase is dependent on the polymerase's affinity for DNA, and any changes which reduce the DNA affinity, lead to reduced nargenicin potency, either through natural variation, as in the case of E. coli Pol III, or through a resistance-conferring mutation (Painter et al., 2015) , as for S. aureus DnaE. Importantly, S. aureus engages two essential DNA polymerases at the replication fork, namely, PolC and DnaE (Inoue et al., 2001) ; if the activity of one is impaired, the other may compensate. However, mycobacteria rely on only one replicative polymerase, DnaE1. Therefore, nargenicin resistance-conferring mutations in DnaE1 could have catastrophic consequences in mycobacteria, which might explain our inability to isolate spontaneous resistant mutants in Mtb or Msm.

DISCUSSION

We have reported multiple lines of evidence that nargenicin acts as a DNA replication inhibitor in mycobacteria by targeting the essential DnaE1 polymerase, an enzyme identified recently as a highly vulnerable component of the DNA replication machinery in Mtb (Bosch et al., 2021) .Unlike the commonly used nucleotide analogs that act as chain terminators through incorporation into the nascent DNA strand, nargenicin does not get incorporated into the DNA.Instead, it is wedged between the terminal base pair of the DNA substrate and the polymerase fingers domain, occupying both the position of the incoming nucleotide and the templating base, which is displaced by nargenicin. This binding mode is analogous to that of the human Pol  inhibitor, aphidicolin, which is derived from the fungus, Cephalosporium aphidicola, and unrelated in structure to nargenicin, indicating that these inhibitors have evolved independently. This unusual mechanism might explain the observation that the antimycobacterial activity of nargenicin was not diminished by over-expression of the cognate target, DnaE1. Based on this mechanism, the DnaE homologue in the Nocardia sp. CS682 producer organism would presumably need to bind nargenicin in a DNA-independent manner in order to fulfil its postulated "decoy" role in self-resistance (Pidot and Rizzacasa, 2020) .Nargenicin-mediated disruption of replisome function triggers a physiological response in Mtb which resembles that elicited by genotoxins which cause double-stranded breaks (DSBs) (mitomycin C, fluoroquinolones) (Boshoff et al., 2003) . This features upregulation of genes encoding the recombinase involved in recombination repair (recA), the mutasome responsible for SOS mutagenesis and damage tolerance (dnaE2, imuA', imuB) (Boshoff et al., 2003; Warner et al., 2010) , the DSB-resecting motor-nuclease (adnAB) (Sinha et al., 2009 ) and a cell wall hydrolase (chiZ) (Chauhan et al., 2006) , amongst other DNA-damage-responsive genes in mycobacteria. The DNA damage response to nargenicin begs the question of whether pharmacological inhibition of DnaE1 by this or other inhibitors might have the unintended consequence of inducing chromosomal mutations which could fuel the evolution of drug resistance, as documented for sub-lethal treatment of mycobacteria and other organisms by fluoroquinolones (Bush et al., 2020; Gillespie et al., 2005) . This question is the subject of ongoing investigation in our laboratories. The concomitant downregulation of ftsZ (de Wet et al., 2020) , sepF (Gupta et al., 2015) , whiB2 (Bush, 2018) and ripA (Gupta et al., 2015) is consistent with cellular elongation resulting from a block in cell division, followed by cell death. Ablation of the SOS response by deletion of recA, or a component thereof (mutasome function) by deletion of dnaE2, had no impact on the antimycobacterial activity of nargenicin, suggesting that the SOS-induced DNA repair, damage tolerance and mutagenesis systems are unable to rescue mycobacteria from the growth inhibitory effects of nargenicin. Instead, an arrest in cell division, as evidenced by bacillary elongation, appears to precede cell death.Another feature of the nargenicin mode of action was the late, strong signal elicited in the GFP release assay. The induction of chiZ and downregulation of fbpC might be telling in this regard: firstly, the damage-inducible protein, ChiZ (Burby and Simmons, 2020) , been reported to arrest cell division, increase filamentation and induce cell lysis when overexpressed (Chauhan et al., 2006) . Secondly, inactivation of the mycolyltransferase, FbpC, a member of the antigen 85 complex involved in the synthesis of trehalose dimycolate and mycolylarabinogalactan, which are key components of the mycobacterial cell envelope, has been shown to significantly reduce the mycolate content and increase the permeability of the cell envelope to small hydrophobic and hydrophilic molecules (Jackson et al., 1999) . Thus, in addition to its replication-arresting activity, nargenicin may also compromise the integrity of the mycobacterial outer membrane and thus, act as a potentiator of other antitubercular agents whose efficacy is limited by permeation across the mycobacterial cell envelope. This intriguing possibility is the subject of active investigation in our laboratories.In summary, the results reported here have positioned DnaE1 as a promising new TB drug target and laid the foundation for target-led drug discovery efforts focused on this enzyme.

SIGNIFICANCE

The ongoing evolution and spread of drug-resistant strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis underscores the importance of identifying and validating new tuberculosis (TB) drug targets.In this study, we report the chemical validation of one such target, the replicative DNA polymerase, DnaE1, with the narrow-spectrum antimicrobial agent, nargenicin. We show that nargenicin mediates its bactericidal activity against M. tuberculosis through interaction with DnaE1 in a manner that depends upon the presence of the DNA substrate. In this interaction, the nargenicin molecule wedges itself between DnaE1 and the terminal base pair of the DNA and occupies the place of both the incoming nucleotide and the templating base. By analysing the physiological consequences of M. tuberculosis exposure to nargenicin, we show that the arrest in bacillary replication resulting from the nargenicin-DnaE1 interaction triggers induction of a DNA damage response coupled with an arrest in cell division and an apparent weakening of the mycobacterial cell envelope. In addition to strongly reaffirming the value of natural products as a source of novel antitubercular agents, this work has provided the rationale and platform for focusing target-led drug discovery efforts on a promising new TB drug target. MIC (black and red bars, respectively). The level of radiolabel incorporation into each macromolecular species is depicted relative the DMSO-treated control. Assay specificity was confirmed using pathway-specific antibiotics as positive controls: ofloxacin (5 μg/mL), streptomycin (10 μg/mL), D-cycloserine (5 μg/mL), and isoniazid (0.2 μg/mL). Error bars represent the standard deviations from two experimental repeats. show dissociation constants of 6 nM, 250 nM and 12 µM, respectively. S. aureus DnaE S765L (green dashed line) which carries a mutation that confers antibiotic resistance, shows a dissociation constant of 85 nM, which is ~14-fold increased, as compared to wild type.

Lead Contact

Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Valerie Mizrahi (valerie.mizrahi@uct.ac.za). the lead contact upon request. Any additional information required to reanalyse the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

Bacterial strains, culture conditions and media

The strains used in this study are listed in the key resources table. These include the parental wildtype strains, Mtb H37Rv (Ioerger et al., 2010) and Msm mc 2 155 (Snapper et al., 1990) . (Shamputa et al., 2010) .

Drug susceptibility testing

MIC testing was performed by broth microdilution assay (Abrahams et al., 2012) andquantitatively analyzed with the colorimetric alamarBlue cell viability reagent (Thermo Fischer Scientific), as previously described (Chengalroyen et al., 2020) .

Bioluminescence assay

PrecA-LUX (Naran et al., 2016) was grown to an OD600 ~ 0.4, diluted 10-fold in 7H9/OADC/Tw and inoculated into white, clear-bottom, 96-well microtiter plates (Greiner CellStar ® ) containing a two-fold serial dilutions of drug. Plates were incubated at 37°C and luminescence recorded every 24 h for 8 days using a SpectraMax i3x plate reader (Molecular Devices). Data were plotted in Prism 9 (GraphPad).

GFP release assay

As described previously (Chengalroyen et al., 2020) , H37Rv-GFP was grown to an OD600 of ~ 0.3 in 7H9 OADC and exposed to drug at 1 or 10 MIC. Every 24 h, over a period of 8 days, 200 µl of culture was harvested, pelleted by centrifugation, and the supernatant transferred to a black, clear-bottom 96-well microtitre plate (Greiner CellStar ® ) and fluorescence (excitation, 540 nm; emission, 590 nm) measured using a SpectraMax i3x plate reader (Molecular Devices). Fluorescence intensity was normalized by OD650 and standardized to the value of the drug-free control for each sample.

Time-kill kinetics

Mtb was inoculated in culture medium at an OD600 of 0.002 and drug added at a concentration of either 1, 5 or 10 MIC. Cultures were incubated in sealed culture flasks and 1 ml aliquots harvested every 24 h over 8 days. The samples were washed twice in fresh media. One hundred µl aliquots of 10-fold serial dilutions were plated of 7H11 agar and colony forming units (CFUs) enumerated after incubation for 3-4 weeks.

Macromolecular incorporation assays

Macromolecular incorporation assays were performed as described (Barrow et al., 2003; Cotsonas King and Wu, 2009) . Briefly, Mtb cultures were grown to early exponential phase 

Microscopy

Msm bacilli were imaged to determine their terminal phenotypes under exposure to varying concentrations of antibiotic as previously described (de Wet et al., 2020) . Strains were grown to late-log phase (OD600 ~ 0.8), filtered once through a Millex syringe filter (5 µm pore size, Millipore) and diluted 1:40 into fresh media. Samples were left untreated, exposed to carrier (Ducret et al., 2016; Schindelin et al., 2012) , R (R Core RStudio Team, 2020) and UMAP as described (de Wet et al., 2020) .

Transcriptional profiling

Microarray experiments and analyses were performed by the NIAID Microarray Research Facility, as previously described (Boshoff et al., 2003) , including two independent samples for each treatment condition. Datasets from cultures exposed to mitomycin C (0.2 µg/ml), and levofloxacin (10 µg/ml) were compared to nargenicin (129 µg/ml). The top 300 upregulated or downregulated genes, ranked by the average Log2 fold-change in expression data from two biological repeats, were compared to generate gene shortlists common to all three treatments. Purified RNA was treated with DNase for an additional 60 min at 37°C using the TURBO DNA-free kit (Ambion) according to the manufacturer's protocol. In preparation for microarray analysis and RNA-seq, the sample quality was confirmed using a Bioanalyzer RNA 6000 Nano Kit and Chips (Agilent). For RNA-seq experiments, three independent biological replicates of both nargenicin-treated (10× MIC) and untreated samples were performed.Library preparation and sequencing was done by Admera Health (NJ, USA) using the Illumina NovaSeq S4 sequencing platform. The sequencing strategy included an average of 60 million 150 bp paired end reads per sample. Reads were demultiplexed to generate raw fastq files for each sample and data deposited in the NCBI SRA repository (PRJNA722614). Initial quality control (QC) of the raw fastQ files was performed using FastQC (Andrews, 2010 (Wang et al., 2016) and dupRadar (Sayols et al., 2016) , and an amalgamated report generated using MultiQC (Ewels et al., 2016) . Transcript quantification was performed using Salmon in mapping-based mode (Patro et al., 2017) . Normalization and differential expression analysis were done using DESeq2 (Love et al., 2014) with count normalization by DESeq2's median or ratios. P-values were adjusted for multiple-testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg approach, and genes which displayed an absolute Log2 fold-change > 1 and an adjusted p-value < 0.05 were considered differentially expressed. Data were visualized in R and functional enrichment of upregulated and downregulated shortlists as compared to the full genome was performed in STRING (Szklarczyk et al., 2018) Scientific). Regions of interest were amplified using primer pairs described in Table S3 and Power SYBR® Green PCR master mix (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and transcript levels for three independent samples quantified on a PikoReal real-time PCR system (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Transcript levels of target genes were normalized to sigA.

Construction of fluorescent dnaE1 hypomorphs

The ATc-regulated CRISPRi system developed by Rock et al. (2017) and Hyg (50 µg/ml).

Drug susceptibility testing using hypomorphs

To assess the impact of dnaE1 silencing on drug susceptibility, the hypomorphs and vector control strains were grown to an OD600 of 1.0 and diluted to an OD600 of 0.01 in media either with ATc (200 ng/ml) or without the inducer. Fifty µl of the diluted culture was inoculated into each well of a MIC plate containing 50 µl of media with 2-fold dilutions of drug. Microtitre plates were incubated at 37°C for 14 days and the fluorescence (594 nm, excitation; and 569 nm, emission) recorded using a Spectramax i3x plate reader. Each strain was normalized to the no-drug control to determine the percentage growth inhibition as a function of drug concentration. Dose-response curves were plotted in Prism 9 (GraphPad).

Protein expression and purification

Mtb DnaE1 was expressed in Msm and purified as previously described (Rock et al., 2015) . S.aureus DnaE and E. coli Pol III were expressed in E. coli BL21 and purified as previously described (Painter et al., 2015; Toste Rego et al., 2013) .

DNA polymerase assay

DNA polymerase activity was measured using a real-time polymerase assay as described previously (Rock et al., 2015) . Briefly, reactions were performed using 5 nM DNA 

Cryo-EM sample preparation and imaging

Purified Mtb DnaE1 was diluted to 4 μM in 20 mM PIPES pH 7.0, 50 mM potassium glutamate, 5 mM MgCl2, 2 mM DTT, and 0.01% Tween-20. The diluted protein was incubated for 5 min with 20 μM DNA substrate (Template: 5'-GATAGAGCAGAAGGACGAAGGACTCCCAACTTTAGGTG, Primer: 5'-GCACCTAAAGTTGGGAGTCCTTCGTCCT*T, where the asterisk marks the position of a phosphorothioate bond). Three μl of sample were adsorbed onto glow-discharged copper R2/1 holey carbon grids (Quantifoil). Grids were glow discharged 45 seconds at 25 mA using an EMITECH K950 apparatus. Grids were blotted for one second at ~80% humidity at 4°C and flash frozen in liquid ethane using a Leica EM GP plunge freezer. The grids were loaded into a Titan Krios (FEI) electron microscope operating at 300 kV with a Gatan K3 detector. The slit width of the energy filter was set to 20 eV. Images were recorded with EPU software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in counting mode. Dose, magnification, and pixel size are detailed in Table   1 .

Cryo-EM image processing

All image processing was performed using RELION 3.1 (Zivanov et al., 2018) . The images were drift corrected using RELION's own (CPU-based) implementation of the UCSF motioncor2, and defocus was estimated using gCTF (Zhang, 2016) . LoG-based auto-picking was performed on all micrographs and picked particles were 2D classified. After three rounds of 2D classification, classes with different orientations were selected for initial model generation in RELION. The initial model was used as reference for 3D classification into different classes. The selected classes from 3D classification were subjected to 3D auto refinement followed by different rounds of CTF refinement plus a final round of Bayesian polishing. Polished particles were used for 3D auto-refine job and the final map was postprocessed to correct for modulation transfer function of the detector and sharpened by applying a negative B-factor manually set to -50. A soft mask was applied during post processing to generate FSC curves to yield a map of average resolution of 2.9 Å. The RELION postprocessed map was used to generate improved-resolution EM maps using the SuperEM method (Subramaniya et al., 2021) , which aided in model building and refinement. Model building was performed using Coot (Emsley et al., 2010) , REFMAC5 (Murshudov et al., 2011) , the CCPEMsuite (Nicholls et al., 2018) and Phenix (Liebschner et al., 2019) . Details on model refinement and validation are shown in Table 1 . In brief, model building started by rigid-body fitting of the known DnaE1 crystal structure (PDB 5LEW) (Baños-Mateos et al., 2017) into experimental density map using Coot. The DNA molecule was generated, and rigid body fitted into experimental density map using Coot. Next, we carried out one round of refinement in REFMAC5 using jelly-body restraints, and the model was further manually adjusted in Coot.Final refinement and model validation were performed using Phenix.

Quantification and statistical analysis

Statistical details are given in methods sections and figure legends, these include details of the experiments, numbers of replicates (technical and/or experimental), statistical software used and thresholds of significance. Significance was generally determined as p<0.05 and correction for multiple comparisons was performed, as appropriate. Independent experiments were performed a minimum of two times and these data were utilised for the generation of summary statistics (mean and standard deviation). Replicate data are included within each figure, as indicated in figure legends, else data are described as a representative experiment. In addition, DNA polymerase assays and DNA binding experiments were performed in three or more independent experiments. Data were not excluded from experimental datasets prior to or during analyses other than during cryo-EM data processing, where particles that did not possess high resolution features were removed following standard procedures for cryo-EM structure determination.

SUPPLEMENTAL ITEMS

Document S1. Figures S1-S6 and Tables S1-S3Data S1. Dataset S1 comprising output genelists of RNA-seq differential gene expression analysis and STRING functional analysis of significantly differentially expressed genes.Related to Figure 2 and Figure 2C . 

