

in the city of Wuhan and rapidly spread through the world causing a global pandemic 1 . 2 The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has been 3 identified as its causal agent 1 . Factors such as older age or presence of comorbidities are 4 frequently identified as variables with a negative impact on patients' prognosis 2 . If we 5 focus on pre-existent respiratory conditions, a higher risk of developing a severe 6 infection has been reported in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 3 . 7 However, there is controversial evidence regarding the prevalence of asthma in COVID- 8 19 patients (see Table in E-Supplement) or the impact of asthma and its treatment on the 9 clinical evolution of COVID-19. 10 We report two severe asthma patients on treatment with benralizumab, an anti- 11 eosinophil monoclonal antibody that have been affected by COVID-19. 12 A 56-year-old woman who has been followed at our severe asthma unit for late-onset, 13 severe, eosinophilic asthma with bronchiectasis without criteria for Asthma-COPD 14 overlap syndrome (ACOS). Her asthma was controlled with high dose inhaled 15 corticosteroids, long-acting beta2-agonist, montelukast, ipratropium and benralizumab. 16 On March 8 th, she went to the emergency room due to a 24-hour episode of fever, 17 arthralgia, myalgia, dyspnea and brownish expectoration. On physical examination, 18 there was no wheeze. Complementary tests showed a unilobar opacity in the right lung a 19 slightly increased C reactive Protein (CRP) and lactate dehydrogenase (Table I) hydroxychloroquine were not started according to hospital´s protocol, at that moment, 24 as the patient did not have hypoxemia). The patient was discharged on the 4th day of admission due to clinical stability, which was maintained without oral corticosteroids.One week later, the patient was asymptomatic. Four relatives also had COVID-19. 27 The other case is a 62-year-old male with severe eosinophilic asthma on treatment with 28 benralizumab since July 2018. Previously, he had received treatment with omalizumab 29 and mepolizumab both discontinued because of poor response. As comorbidities, he had 30 moderate obstructive sleep apnoea, chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps, 31 bronchiectasis and obesity (body mass index 33 kg/m2). He did not fulfilled criteria of 32 ACOS. On March 25 th the patient had cough, fever and darker and thicker than his usual 33 expectoration so he self-medicated with levofloxacin 500 mg for 3 days. Due to lack of 34 improvement of symptoms, he was evaluated at primary care where a chest x-ray was 35 done that showed peripheral and bilateral opacities, more evident in mid / lower lung 36 areas, compatible with COVID-19 pneumonia ( Figure 1 ) and was referred to the 37 emergency room. One relative, who lived with him, had the same symptoms. 38 Complementary tests showed lymphopenia with increased levels of LDH, CRP, D-39 dimers, fibrinogen (Table 1) 

