

The current cumulative number of cases is almost 20-times larger than the range the upper limit of the axis shown by the authors (25000 vs ~1400). This clearly shows how the authors' analysis is not sufficiently careful and that, with the data available at the moment of submission (and most likely now too) their methods and fitting should absolutely not be used to make forecasts. This fact alone is sufficient to recommend the rejection of the paper. Below, you will find specific comments concerning the modeling approach and other remarks.

Day before submission

Range shown in Figs 4 and 5 by authors COMMENTS 1. The title is far too general. There are already too many papers modeling the evolution of COVID19 to use a title like this. The authors should to specify already in the title the novel/different aspects of their modeling/analysis and that they are applying it to study data from Cyprus.2. The choice of a step-wise probability of recovery P differs, as the authors mention, from the exponentially decaying profile usually used for compartmental model like the classic SIR one. The author should motivate more clearly why they think the step-like profile is more realistic for the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic than the exponential profile. They should also discuss how much their results and predictions depend on this specific choice and what qualitative difference they expect from the usually employed exponential choice.3. The authors allow the transmission rate to vary in time and characterize this by the use of 5 parameters. As common in similar approaches, there is some arbitrariness in how the time dependence of transmission rate is chosen. It is then difficult to make reliable forecasts based on these highly simplified models with several assumptions on the transmission rates that are hard to properly justify. Resorting to publicly available mobility data can guide the modeling, even though, it remains difficult to capture seasonality effects and the influence of other containment measures not based on reducing mobility (such as face-mask wearing). The authors should comment on this. I would invite the authors to take this aspect into account or to motivate in the paper why they do not think it is relevant for their analysis.

