

In the swell of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, the world rushed to find therapeutic and prophylactic treatments, and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) became an early front-runner (1, 2) . HCQ is a common anti-malarial/-rheumatologic drug with immunosuppressive functions. Early in vitro studies suggested HCQ might be repurposed to treat infections with a strong immune component (1, 3, 4) , such as COVID- 19 . This was appealing considering its low cost and widespread availability. TheUnited States (US) Food and Drug Administration issued an emergency use authorization for HCQ on March 28, 2020(5) prior to the completion of a randomized controlled trial, only to revoke it less than 3 months later, following concerns about HCQ associated adverse events reported by observational studies (6, 7) .Around the same time as the US Food and Drug Administration's retraction, several randomized controlled trials, ORCHID, RECOVERY and SOLIDARITY discontinued their HCQ arms due to interim analyses showing no benefit in reducing COVID-19 inpatient mortality (8) (9) (10) . These trials recently made their results public (11) (12) (13) . While randomized controlled trials are a gold standard for evaluating the effectiveness of a drug (14) , none of those investigating HCQ treatment explored the combination with azithromycin in their study design. Azithromycin has also been given Results from observational studies of HCQ in treating COVID-19 have been inconsistent, and subject to bias (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) . Early studies claiming a benefit were from small samples with limited data and little control of potential confounders. Timing of treatment during hospitalization was often poorly defined, no studies appeared to control for secular trends in the timing of treatment, and several studies used data from HCQ use prior to the US Food and Drug Administration's initial emergency use authorization (20) . Particularly, the study design and analytic techniques may not have been able to account for the various sources of potential and residual confounding (21) (22) (23) .In a recent meta-analysis of HCQ and mortality in patients hospitalized with COVID-19(16), 25 of the 29 studies used observational data, and 10 of these peerreviewed and pre-print publications used some form of propensity adjustment. One main goal of propensity analysis is to balance confounding factors in order to emulate a randomized controlled trial setting (24) . Recent studies on propensity scoring have found that machine learning methods can achieve better balance than traditional regression methods in observational studies (25) (26) (27) (28) (29) . Gradient boosted modeling using decision trees allows for interactions among the variables used in propensity score calculation and makes no assumptions about the shape of the relationship between the confounder and treatment received (25) .In this paper we apply careful study design and statistical analytic approaches, considered as potential confounders of treatment and both primary outcomes were chronic medications, concurrent inpatient treatments (for COVID-19 or HCQ contraindications), chronic conditions (based on diagnostic codes and including a frailty score(33)), and acute laboratory results and vital signs (those related to acute illness).All potential confounders were included in the propensity model. Complete descriptions of diagnostic and medication codes can be found in Web Tables 1-2 and Web Appendix 1.

Statistical analyses

All analyses were performed using R software (R Foundation for StatisticalComputing, Vienna, Austria)(34) and publicly available packages.Missing data -Missing covariate information was imputed using the multiple imputation from chained equations "mice" package in R (35, 36) . Ten imputed data sets were generated, analyzed separately, and the final results were subsequently combined using Rubin's rules to determine final effect sizes and confidence intervals (37) .Propensity score calculation -Propensity scores for each treatment were estimated from a Gradient Boosting Machine (GBM) (38) , an ensemble of models that take baseline measures and characteristics as inputs and outputs the patient's predicted probability (or propensity score) for receiving each treatment (Both, HCQ alone, azithromycin alone, or neither). We employed decision trees as base learners for GBM, using the "gbm" and "WeightIt" R packages to fit our models (39, 40) . The hyperparameters were set as: interaction depth of 4, maximum of 5000 trees, and shrinkage of 0.1. We optimized the maximum of standardized mean differences between potential confounders across the treatment arms.For each patient, the propensity score was converted to a stabilized inverse probability of treatment weight. We evaluated the propensity scores using the "cobalt" package in R to look at the distributions of average standardized mean differences between each pair of treatments (41) . The relative influence (42) was calculated as the normalized amount of change in the balance metric for each variable when it was used to split a node.Outcome models -The stabilized inverse probability of treatment weights from the propensity modeling steps were included as subject-level weights in Cox proportional hazards multivariable models for estimating treatment effects on mortality and intubation using the "survival" package(43) in R. An alpha level of 0.05 was used.

Sensitivity analyses

We assessed design assumptions and data restrictions with a series of sensitivity analyses to address questions regarding timing, analytic design, and methods. To consider whether timing of treatment initiation made a difference in survival, we considered a shorter 24-hour exposure window, with corresponding adjustments in exclusions and outcomes. We explored the effect of the secular prescribing trend(s) by limiting analyses to time windows framed by regulatory guidelines and patterns of use within the VA. The final set of sensitivity analyses focused on the statistical and machine learning methods and assumptions. We additionally considered a set of doubly-robust models, where select confounders were included in both the propensity and outcome models (44, 45) . Complete details about cohort restrictions and sensitivity analyses performed can be found in Web Table 3 and Web Appendix 2. There were few measurable changes in the effect estimates and confidence intervals of the two comparisons (Both vs. neither; HCQ alone vs. neither) for many of the sensitivity analyses. Figure 5 summarizes the average treatment effect HR (95% CI) for those initiating any combination of HCQ compared to neither treatment in the 48 hours following admission. Complete results, including event counts and number exposed, from all sensitivity analyses can be found in Web Tables 6-7 .Censoring at change in treatment (adding either azithromycin or HCQ after 48 hours post-hospitalization) produced substantially different results for mortality (HCQ vs. Figure 5A ).This corresponded to 75 fewer "cases", mostly from the neither group. A similar pattern of inflated hazard ratios and fewer cases can be seen for the intubation outcome ( Figure   5B ). (57), thus is not preferred over the intention-to-treat method used. In fact, we observed this bias in the shifted HRs and confidence intervals that made HCQ (both with and without azithromycin) appear harmful compared to neither treatment.After 48 hours from index date, approximately 25% of the combination treatment patients were in the intensive care unit, compared to 5% in the neither group, 19% in the azithromycin alone group, and 13% for those on HCQ alone. We did not look at this particular outcome or adjust for it as a confounder in the propensity models. However, in a sensitivity analysis removing these individuals, the HRs for both mortality and intubation of the combined treatment group, relative to neither treatment, shifted completely to the null, indicating that HCQ may have been seen as a "rescue" therapy in intensive care unit patients. Of note, even with this restriction, there is no evidence of benefit.Despite our array of sensitivity analyses, we acknowledge that there is still a possibility of some unmeasured and residual confounding that we were unable to account for. However, the GBM approach allowed us to control for many variables, and any remaining unmeasured confounders would likely require strong associations with both the treatment assignment and outcomes, to explain away the null relationship observed in the data. Squares with solid lines and diamonds with dashed lines represent the hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals corresponding to the average treatment effects of hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) and HCQ with azithromycin (Both) compared to neither treatment, respectively. Sensitivity analyses -Differences from Primary Analysis: 

