

Alopecia Areata (AA) is a common cause of immune-mediated non-scarring hair loss. Links between AA and common mental health, autoimmune and atopic conditions, and common infections have previously been described but remain incompletely elucidated and contemporary descriptions of the epidemiology of AA in the UK are lacking.

Methods and analysis:

Retrospective study series using a large population-based cohort (5. In the epidemiology theme, we will describe the incidence and prevalence of AA overall and by age, sex, and sociodemographic factors. Healthcare utilisation (primary care visits and secondary care referrals) and treatments for AA will also be assessed. In the mental health theme, we will describe the prevalence and incidence of mental-health conditions (anxiety, depressive episodes, recurrent depressive disorder, adjustment disorder, agoraphobia, self-harm, and parasuicide) in people with AA compared with matched controls. We will also explore mental health treatment patterns ( Retrospective study series using a large population-based cohort (5. In the epidemiology theme, we will describe the incidence and point prevalence of AA overall and by age, sex, and sociodemographic factors. Healthcare utilisation (primary care visits and secondary care referrals) and treatments for AA will also be assessed. In the mental health theme, we will explore the prevalence and incidence of mental-health conditions (anxiety, depressive episodes, recurrent depressive disorder, adjustment disorder, agoraphobia, self-harm, and parasuicide) in people with AA compared with matched controls. We will also explore mental health treatment patterns (medication and psychological interventions), time off work and unemployment rates. Within the 

Strengths and limitations of this study

 We will use a nationally representative primary care database of over 5.2 million people to explore the epidemiology of alopecia areata (AA), as well as associations of AA with mental health conditions, autoimmune and atopic conditions, and common infections.  As national guidelines recommend initial assessment and management of AA is undertaken in primary care, this study will provide an accurate contemporary analysis of AA epidemiology in England in both children and adults.  The Oxford-RCGP-RSC primary care dataset has a high level of completeness on sociodemographic and geographic data and therefore enables an assessment of variation in the incidence and prevalence of AA across England.  Oxford-RCGP-RSC is the primary infectious disease sentinel network for the (1) Clinical presentations of AA are heterogeneous, ranging from welldemarcated patches of hair loss on the scalp to total loss of hair on the scalp (alopecia areata totalis) or entire scalp and body (alopecia areata universalis). (2) Active AA is estimated to affect approximately 0.1-0.2% (2, 3) of the population worldwide, with a lifetime risk of 1.0-2.1%. (4) (5) (6) Following the initial episode, the majority of those with limited patchy AA will experience spontaneous remission, but over 80% will have subsequent relapses.(7) Spontaneous remission has been reported to occur in less than 10% of those with extensive AA.(7) A number of treatment options can induce hair growth in people with AA, but none have been shown to have a durable impact on remission. (8) AA has been associated with a number of autoimmune conditions, supporting the theory of an underlying autoimmune aetiology. (9) Atopic conditions and mental health disorders have also been demonstrated to be more common in people with AA, (9) (10) (11) although the temporal relationship between psychiatric conditions and AA remains poorly researched. (12) The association between AA and common infections is not well studied.This study series, using a large contemporary population-based sample aims to explore and describe many important elements of AA over four key areas: i) the Clinic-based studies from around the world have estimated the incidence of AA to be in the region of 0.57-3.8%. (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) Worldwide, the majority of studies on AA have not found a significant difference in incidence between males and females.  We will use a nationally representative primary care database of over 5.2 million people to explore the epidemiology of alopecia areata (AA), as well as associations of AA with mental health conditions, autoimmune and atopic conditions, and common infections.  As national guidelines recommend initial assessment and management of AA is undertaken in primary care, this study will provide an accurate contemporary analysis of AA epidemiology in England in both children and adults.  The Oxford-RCGP-RSC primary care dataset has a high level of completeness on sociodemographic and geographic data and therefore enables an assessment of variation in the incidence and prevalence of AA across England.  Oxford-RCGP-RSC is the primary infectious disease sentinel network for the UK; the common in infections to be explored are all regularly monitored conditions within the network.  A limitation of the study is that a validated case definition of AA is not available for primary care databases; this will be mitigated by additional analysis to explore the sensitivity of findings when non-specific alopecia diagnostic codes (e.g. unspecified alopecia) are included.

Mental Health Comorbidities

It is well-recognised by clinical experts in AA that the condition can have a profound psychological impact and a possible comorbid burden of mental health conditions. A recent USA cross-sectional database study comparing 5,605 patients with AA with matched controls found a higher prevalence of mental health diagnoses in the AA group (32.8% vs 20.0%). (19) In particular, higher rates of 59-15.35) were observed when compared with controls. (19) These findings concur with previous work and a similar pattern is seen in other countries. (20) (21) (22) (23) Recently a British study identified a bi-directional positive association between major depressive disorder and AA. (24) In a sample of over 400,000 participants, major depressive disorder was seen to increase the risk of incident AA by 90% [HR 1.90, 95%CI 1.67-2.15] and AA was found to increase the risk of incident major depressive disorder by 34% [HR 1.34, 95%CI 1. 23-1.46] . (24) The association of other common mental health conditions with AA however was not assessed. 2.08-12.51), psoriasis (HR 2.01; 95%CI 1.06-3.83) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) (HR 1.79; 95%CI 1.07-3.00) were observed. (27) There was no relationship between AA and Hashimoto's thyroiditis or type 1 diabetes (T1DM). A recent systematic review and meta-analysis found AA to be significantly associated with Graves' Disease (OR 2.07, 95%CI 1.80-2.38) and Hashimoto's Thyroiditis (OR 2.15; 95%CI 1.71-2.72) but not with SLE, RA, Psoriasis or T1DM. (9) There has also been interest in the prevalence of co-morbid atopy in patients with AA. The prevalence of atopy in patients with AA has been reported to be in the range of 11-38.2% (5) representing cohorts from the USA, India and Singapore . (11, 14, 28, 29) A large meta-analysis found patients with AA had higher odds of having atopic dermatitis (OR 2.36; 95%CI 1.80-3.09) or allergic rhinitis (OR 1. conditions, and a genome-wide association study established that IL-13 is also susceptible loci for AA. (30) 

Common infections

It has been hypothesized that infections may act as triggers for AA; with particular interest in Helicobacter pylori, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and human immunodeficiency virus but others have also been suggested. (9, (31) (32) (33) (34) (35) (36) (37) (38) Some case reports have suggested improvement or resolution of AA with treatment of the associated infection. (33, 39) . However, early small-scale studies have failed to find convincing evidence to support associations. (35, 36, 40) Multiple genetic loci have been identified to be both protective from infection but increase the risk for autoimmune disease. (41) Examples include the HLA variants HLA-DQ2 and HLA-DQ8 which confer protection against viral infections including influenza but are associated with inflammatory bowel disease, (42, 43) and SH2B3 rs3184504*A gene variant protective against Escherichia coli infection but also detrimental for inflammatory bowel disease. (44) These loci which, in the past have conferred a genetic advantage, may still confer a reduced infection risk. (41) It is currently unclear if the genetic predisposition for AA is caused by genetic factors which also confer protection against any common infections. In other autoimmune conditions infection risk is often increased as a result of the pathological changes resulting from the condition itself, the effects of immune-modulatory treatment, or through increased exposure to pathogens through healthcare contact. (45) (46) (47) (48) (49) (50) (51) An understanding of the relative infection rates in people with AA compared to those It has been hypothesized that infections may act as triggers for AA; with particular interest in Helicobacter pylori, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and human immunodeficiency virus but others have also been suggested. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 

Aims and Objectives

We aim to perform a series of retrospective studies using a large population-based cohort in England, over a decade (1 st Within the epidemiology theme, our initial objective is to provide a complete description of the incidence and prevalence of AA in England. We will explore the influence of socio-demographic and geographic factors on disease incidence and describe the current service utilisation and management patterns in AA during the year after diagnosis.Within the mental health theme, we will explore the disease burden of common mental health conditions in people with AA compared with matched controls. We will calculate the prevalence of disease at AA diagnosis, the incidence of disease in the first two years after diagnosis and the influence of socio-demographic factors on the prevalence of common mental health conditions in AA. We will describe the mental health treatment burden in people (medication and psychological service use) with AA and depression and anxiety. We will also explore potential associations between AA and both time off work and unemployment.Within the autoimmune and atopic comorbidities theme, we will examine the prevalence of atopic and autoimmune conditions at AA diagnosis, and the incidence Within the common infections theme, we will examine the incidence of multiple common infections in the first five years after diagnosis in people with AA compared with matched controls.The primary and secondary objects of each study theme are formally described in the Statistical Analysis Plan (Additional file 1). The RCGP RSC database includes patient demographics, diagnoses, laboratory test results, primary care issued prescriptions and processes of care such as clinic visits and specialist referrals. These data are coded using the Read code system. UK general practice records provide several advantages for this study type; UK primary care is a registration-based system (a patient can only register with a single GP), records have been computerised since the 1990s, and pay-forperformance targets (introduced in 2004 through The Quality and Outcomes Framework; QOF) have resulted in consistent high-quality clinical data entry about chronic disease. (54, 55) Studies in many chronic diseases such as atopic dermatitis, rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes, inflammatory bowel disease, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease have been published using RCGP RSC data. (51, (56) (57) (58) (59) RCGP RSC practices get feedback on their data quality, with a particular We aim to perform a series of retrospective studies using a large population-based cohort in England, over a decade (1 st January 2009 to 1 st January 2019) exploring AA in four theme areas: epidemiology, mental health, autoimmune and atopic comorbidities and common infections.Within the epidemiology theme, our initial objective is to provide a complete description of the incidence and prevalence of AA in England. We will explore the influence of socio-demographic and geographic factors on disease incidence and describe the current service utilisation and management patterns in AA during the year after diagnosis.Within the mental health theme, we will explore the disease burden of common mental health conditions in people with AA compared with matched controls. We will calculate the prevalence of disease at AA diagnosis, the incidence of disease in the first two years after diagnosis and the influence of socio-demographic factors on the prevalence of common mental health conditions in AA. We will describe the mental health treatment burden in people (medication and psychological service use) with AA and depression and anxiety. We will also explore potential associations between AA and both time off work and unemployment.Within the autoimmune and atopic comorbidities theme, we will examine the prevalence of atopic and autoimmune conditions at AA diagnosis, and the incidence Within the common infections theme, we will examine the incidence of multiple common infections in the first five years after diagnosis in people with AA compared with matched controls.The primary and secondary objects of each study theme are formally described in the Statistical Analysis Plan (Additional file 1). 

Study design

Within RCGP RSC, people with and without AA will be identified using Read diagnostic codes. A range of study designs will be used across the studies and include; repeated cross-sectional design (epidemiology of AA), case-control design (the prevalence of common mental health conditions, atopic and autoimmune conditions, and common infections at AA diagnosis), and matched-cohort design (the incidence of common mental health conditions, atopic and autoimmune conditions, and common infections after AA diagnosis).Within RCGP RSC, people with and without AA will be identified using Read diagnostic codes. A range of study designs will be used across the studies and include; repeated cross-sectional design (epidemiology of AA), case-control design (the prevalence of common mental health conditions, atopic and autoimmune conditions, and common infections at AA diagnosis), and matched-cohort design (the incidence of common mental health conditions, atopic and autoimmune conditions, and common infections after AA diagnosis).

Alopecia areata case detection

We will identify cases of AA using specific diagnostic codes (Supplementary Table   S1 .1, Additional file 2). Confirmed AA will be defined as one or more AA code and no alternative diagnostic code in the subsequent 365 days (alternative diagnoses are defined in Supplementary Table S1.1, Additional file 2).For sensitivity analyses we will also extract alopecia recorded where the type has not been specified (Supplementary Table S1 We will identify cases of AA using specific diagnostic codes (Supplementary Table   S1 .1, Additional file 2). Confirmed AA will be defined as one or more AA code and no alternative diagnostic code in the subsequent 365 days (alternative diagnoses are defined in Supplementary Table S1.1, Additional file 2). Specificity of findings to this case definition will be evaluated (see Sensitivity analysis and Supplementary 

Study 1: Epidemiology of alopecia areata

The incidence and lifetime prevalence of alopecia areataWe will describe the incidence and point prevalence of AA over [2009] [2010] [2011] [2012] [2013] [2014] [2015] [2016] [2017] [2018] inclusive, by age group, sex, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status, and geographical region. Ethnicity will be categorised as follows based on UK census categories:White, Asian, Black African/Caribbean, Mixed, and Other.(61) Index of multiple deprivation (IMD) will be used as a measure of socioeconomic status. (62) Service utilisation in people with alopecia areataWe will assess primary care visit frequency, up to one year, in people newly diagnosed with AA compared to matched controls without AA. Measures of healthcare management will also be assessed in people newly diagnosed with AA up to one year, comprising; secondary care dermatology referrals (Supplementary   Table S1 .3, Additional file 2) and primary care prescriptions for AA treatments (Supplementary Table S1 .4, Additional file 2).

Study 2: Mental Health conditions in people with alopecia areata

We will assess the prevalence and incidence of three common mental conditions as To assess prevalence, we will perform a case-control analysis to compare the prevalence of mental health conditions between people newly diagnosed with AA and controls. To assess incidence, we will perform a matched cohort analysis in the subset of cases and controls free of the mental health conditions of interest at baseline. In addition, we will examine the prevalence and incidence of other mental health conditions; adjustment disorder, agoraphobia, self-harm, and overdose/parasuicide attempts (Supplementary Tables S2.5-S2.9, Additional file 2).We will determine the treatment burden of mental health medications in AA (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, tetracyclic antidepressants, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors, anxiolytic medications) and psychological intervention (referral rates for counselling, secondary care psychiatrist referrals, including the referrals to the clinical psychology services/specialists and UK Improving Access to Table S2 .10, Additional file 2)).We will also assess unemployment and time off work in people of working age . Unemployment will be identified using codes relating to unemployment recorded in the clinical record or the issuing of IB113 or ESA113 form (Supplementary Table S3 .1, Additional file 2). These forms are completed by GPs when their patients are accessing incapacity benefits (historically) or employment and support allowance (current) because of a disability or health condition affecting their ability to work. Time off work will be assessed by reporting the rates of issue of Med 3 (Statement of Fitness for Work) certification from primary care (Supplementary Table S3 .2, Additional file 2). These "fit notes" are required by employers when employees have periods of absence from work for sickness lasting longer than seven days.We will assess the prevalence and incidence of three common mental conditions as 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 To assess prevalence, we will perform a case-control analysis to compare the prevalence of mental health conditions between people newly diagnosed with AA and controls. To assess incidence, we will perform a matched cohort analysis in the subset of cases and controls free of the mental health conditions of interest at baseline. In addition, we will examine the prevalence and incidence of other mental health conditions; adjustment disorder, agoraphobia, self-harm, and overdose/parasuicide attempts (Supplementary Tables S2.5-S2.9, Additional file 2).We will determine the treatment burden of mental health medications in AA (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, tetracyclic antidepressants, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors, anxiolytic medications) and psychological intervention (referral rates for counselling, secondary care psychiatrist referrals, including the referrals to the clinical psychology services/specialists and UK Improving Access to Table S2 .10, Additional file 2)).We will also assess unemployment and time off work in people of working age . Unemployment will be identified using codes relating to unemployment recorded in the clinical record or the issuing of IB113 or ESA113 form (Supplementary Table S3 Table S3 .2, Additional file 2). These "fit notes" are required by employers when employees have periods of absence from work for sickness lasting longer than seven days.

Study 3: Autoimmune and atopic comorbidities in alopecia areata

We will assess the prevalence and incidence of autoimmune and atopic conditions as listed in Table 1 and defined in Supplementary Tables S4, Additional file 2, in people with AA. To assess prevalence, we will perform a case-control study to compare the prevalence of these conditions between cases and controls. To assess incidence, we will perform a matched cohort study to compare the incidence of new autoimmune and atopic conditions in the same cases and controls after the point of matching. Autoimmune and atopic conditions were included if prevalence has been reported to be 0.3% or greater. (9, (64) (65) (66) (67) This cut-off was based on power calculations suggesting this is minimum background prevalence required to detect We will assess the prevalence and incidence of autoimmune and atopic conditions as listed in Table 1 and defined in Supplementary Tables S4, Additional file 2, in people with AA. To assess prevalence, we will perform a case-control study to compare the prevalence of these conditions between cases and controls. To assess incidence, we will perform a matched cohort study to compare the incidence of new autoimmune and atopic conditions in the same cases and controls after the point of matching. Autoimmune and atopic conditions were included if prevalence has been reported to be 0.3% or greater. (9, (64) (65) (66) (67) This cut-off was based on power calculations suggesting this is minimum background prevalence required to detect 

Study 4: common infections in alopecia areata

We will assess the incidence of common infections in people with AA using a matched cohort study to compare the incidence of common infections in cases and controls. The common infections to be examined are listed in Table 2 and defined in Supplementary Tables S5, Additional file 2.We will assess the incidence of common infections in people with AA using a matched cohort study to compare the incidence of common infections in cases and controls. The common infections to be examined are listed in Table 2 and defined in Supplementary Tables S5, Additional file 2.

Statistical methods

The full statistical analysis plan is provided in Additional file 1. Briefly, for Study 1, AA prevalence will be calculated by dividing the number of AA cases by the total number of eligible people in the study population. Point prevalence will be reported for the cohort overall and stratified by sex and age. AA incidence will be calculated by dividing the total number of new AA cases by the total person-years of follow-up. Incidence rates will be stratified by calendar year, socio-demographic factors (age group, sex, ethnicity, rural/urban classification and socioeconomic status) and geographical region. Adjusted incidence rates will be estimated using Poisson regression.Service utilisation (Study 1 and 2) will be evaluated by calculation of annual primary care attendance rates, treatment rates (prescriptions per person per year), and the total proportion of people with one or more referral for additional services For studies 1 (for comparison of primary care visit frequency only), 2 and 3, matching will be performed as follows: control cohorts will be defined by matching cases with people without a diagnosis of AA or other alopecia. The follow-up period for each matched control will begin at the start of follow-up of their matched case.Each case will be nearest neighbour matched with four controls by age and sex within GP practices. After matching, if there are substantial differences in socioeconomic status between cases and controls, re-matching with IMD as an additional matching criterion will be considered. Study 4 will use the same nearest neighbour matching process but cases will be defined as people diagnosed with AA on or before 1 st January 2014, people who develop AA during follow up will be excluded from the pool of available controls prior to matching.For Study 2, we will report the prevalence of mental health conditions by sociodemographic subgroups in cases and controls. The burden of treatment for mental health conditions will be estimated as the total proportion of people prescribed each treatment within one year after the study start. The burden of sick days will be estimated as the total proportion of people issued a Med 3 certificate. To assess differences in incident mental health conditions in the two years after the study start, we will use adjusted Cox regression stratified by case/control status. Study 3 (atopic and autoimmune conditions) will similarly compare baseline disease prevalence in cases and controls, and compare incidence of new onset conditions in the five years after the study start using adjusted Cox regression. Infection incidence rates will be estimated by dividing the number of incident common infections by total person-years of follow-up. Adjusted Poisson regression will be used to estimate the association between AA and rates of common infection.The full statistical analysis plan is provided in Additional file 1. Briefly, for Study 1, AA prevalence will be calculated by dividing the number of AA cases by the total number of eligible people in the study population. Point prevalence will be reported for the cohort overall and stratified by sex and age. AA incidence will be calculated by dividing the total number of new AA cases by the total person-years of follow-up. Incidence rates will be stratified by calendar year, socio-demographic factors (age group, sex, ethnicity, rural/urban classification and socioeconomic status) and geographical region. Adjusted incidence rates will be estimated using For studies 1 (for comparison of primary care visit frequency only), 2 and 3, matching will be performed as follows: control cohorts will be defined by matching cases with people without a diagnosis of AA or other alopecia. The follow-up period for each matched control will begin at the start of follow-up of their matched case.Each case will be nearest neighbour matched with four controls by age and sex within GP practices. After matching, if there are substantial differences in socioeconomic status between cases and controls, re-matching with IMD as an additional matching criterion will be considered. Study 4 will use the same nearest neighbour matching process but cases will be defined as people diagnosed with AA on or before 1 st January 2014, people who develop AA during follow up will be excluded from the pool of available controls prior to matching.For Study 2, we will report the prevalence of mental health conditions by sociodemographic subgroups in cases and controls. The burden of treatment for mental health conditions will be estimated as the total proportion of people prescribed each treatment within one year after the study start. The burden of sick days will be estimated as the total proportion of people issued a Med 3 certificate. To assess differences in incident mental health conditions in the two years after the study start, we will use adjusted Cox regression stratified by case/control status. Study 3 (atopic and autoimmune conditions) will similarly compare baseline disease prevalence in cases and controls, and compare incidence of new onset conditions in the five years after the study start using adjusted Cox regression. Infection incidence rates will be estimated by dividing the number of incident common infections by total person-years of follow-up. Adjusted Poisson regression will be used to estimate the association between AA and rates of common infection.

Sensitivity analyses

We will compare prevalence (Studies 2-3) and incidence (Studies 2-4) of the study outcomes in people with non-specific alopecia codes only (i.e. no prior or subsequent codes specifying alopecia type).In Study 4, we will use a Cox regression to estimate time to first infection. We will also compare the results of the study outcomes when 1) people who develop AA during the follow up are included as cases and 2) when we perform matching using the time of AA diagnosis and follow for up to five years after diagnosis (or matched date for controls).To evaluate the specificity of any identified associations to our AA case definition, in sensitivity analysis we will extract alopecia recorded where the type has not been specified (Supplementary Table S1 .1, Additional file 2). We will then assess the characteristics of people with non-specific alopecia codes only (i.e. no prior or subsequent codes specifying alopecia type) compared to the primary AA cohort. If the characteristics are not markedly different, which would indicate the groups are clinically different and not comparable, we will evaluate major study outcomes in this non-specific AA cohort and compare results to those obtained for the primary AA cohort. We will also evaluate whether stratifying analyses by alopecia extent is possible, dependent on how well this is recorded in primary care data (Supplementary Table S1 .2, Additional file 2).In Study 4, we will use a Cox regression to estimate time to first infection. We will also compare the results of the study outcomes when 1) people who develop AA during the follow up are included as cases and 2) when we perform matching using the time of AA diagnosis and follow for up to five years after diagnosis (or matched date for controls). 

Data management

Individual patient data will be anonymised at the point of data extraction. All data will remain in anonymised form and will be held on a secure server at the University of Surrey. All statistical analyses will be performed using R software. Individual patient data will be anonymised at the point of data extraction. All data will remain in anonymised form and will be held on a secure server at the University of Surrey. All statistical analyses will be performed using R software.

Clinical Implications

Results derived from this study will be useful in monitoring trends in the incidence of AA in England and may identify factors that influence the disease distribution and treatment patterns. Furthermore, obtaining an accurate picture of the state of AA in the UK will help inform Health Needs Assessments and policy development.A greater understanding of the prevalence of mental health conditions associated with AA and the directionality of these relationships may help with the development of psychological interventions in AA, as the approach required would likely differ if the symptoms patients are experiencing are pervasive or reactive to an episode of hair loss. (12, 68) Awareness of AA as a potential risk factor or associated comorbidity for certain autoimmune and atopic conditions may help reduce delays in diagnosis for these conditions and increase vigilance of GPs and dermatologists when reviewing their patients with AA in detecting co-existent conditions. Future work may focus upon whether improved control of an underlying autoimmune or atopic condition may improve chances of achieving remission in AA. Results derived from this study will be useful in monitoring trends in the incidence of AA in England and may identify factors that influence the disease distribution and treatment patterns. Furthermore, obtaining an accurate picture of the state of AA in the UK will help inform Health Needs Assessments and policy development. 

Strengths and limitations of the research methods

Several strengths of our study design are noteworthy. Only two previous studies on the incidence and prevalence of AA have been population-based, with the vast majority being conducted on clinic patients and thus leading to skewed prevalence estimates. This study will also provide a contemporary picture of the burden of AA, as the previous population-based studies were over 20 years ago, and this will be the first AA epidemiology study conducted in the UK. To our knowledge, our study examining common infections will be the first study to attempt to answer the question of whether AA confers protection or increased risk for common infections.A final key strength of this study is the use of the national infections surveillance network to analyse infection risk; with regular feedback to practices with a focus (53) and hence our results are broadly generalisable to the UK as a whole but should not be extended to populations which are dissimilar.There are also several limitations of the study design that are worthy of consideration. This study does not attempt to detect cases of AA (or the comorbidities of interest) that do not present to medical attention and hence may underestimate the true burden of disease. Furthermore, only coded data in the database can be used and hence we rely upon accurate coding. Some individuals may need to be excluded due to incomplete data, although in similar studies the exclusion rate due to incomplete data has been low. (70, 71) Prevalence of Med 3 certification is well captured in primary care but the reason for issue is not available meaning that we cannot identify the condition relating to the Med 3 certification. We cannot therefore determine whether the sick leave was as a result of AA. However, our case-control approach will provide a method for comparing Med 3 certificate issue rates in those affected and unaffected by AA. The use of Read codes to identify unemployment is likely to systemically underestimate unemployment prevalence but is likely to be suitable for providing a comparison with controls.Another limitation is the possibility of missing treatment information from secondary care. Secondary care records in the UK are frequently not computerised and prescriptions are still commonly hand-written. At present there is no mechanism for universally capturing secondary care prescriptions and linking them to primary care records. We are therefore likely to underestimate prescription rates for those with the most severe disease who are seen frequently in secondary care. Where prescriptions are issued from primary care the indication for the prescription is not available and we can therefore not confirm that the prescription is for the treatment of AA.Several strengths of our study design are noteworthy. Only two previous studies on the incidence and prevalence of AA have been population-based, with the vast majority being conducted on clinic patients and thus leading to skewed prevalence estimates. This study will also provide a contemporary picture of the burden of AA, as the previous population-based studies were over 20 years ago, and this will be the first AA epidemiology study conducted in the UK. To our knowledge, our study examining common infections will be the first study to attempt to answer the question of whether AA confers protection or increased risk for common infections.A final key strength of this study is the use of the national infections surveillance network to analyse infection risk; with regular feedback to practices with a focus on the quality of infections recording the quality of recording of these infection events higher in this network than other data sources.A limitation of the study is the lack of a validated AA case definition using primary care data. We are unable to develop one as we have access only to coded anonymised healthcare record data for this study. However, our ontological approach to detecting cases of AA and associated comorbidities will improve accuracy compared to the use of diagnostic codes alone.(69, 70) Exclusion of individuals with potentially confounding conditions (i.e. other causes of hair loss) will also improve the accuracy of our estimates. The algorithms used to detect common mental health conditions have been previously validated in UK primary care. The completeness of GP data coding for prescriptions, referrals and issue of Med 3 certificates will ensure that our findings on AA and comorbidity Furthermore, only coded data in the database can be used and hence we rely upon accurate coding. Some individuals may need to be excluded due to incomplete data, although in similar studies the exclusion rate due to incomplete data has been low.(72, 73) Prevalence of Med 3 certification is well captured in primary care but the reason for issue is not available meaning that we cannot identify the condition relating to the Med 3 certification. We cannot therefore determine whether the sick leave was as a result of AA. However, our case-control approach will provide a method for comparing Med 3 certificate issue rates in those affected and unaffected by AA. The use of Read codes to identify unemployment is likely to systemically under- Another limitation is the possibility of missing treatment information from secondary care. Secondary care records in the UK are frequently not computerised and prescriptions are still commonly hand-written. At present there is no mechanism for universally capturing secondary care prescriptions and linking them to primary care records. We are therefore likely to underestimate prescription rates for those with the most severe disease who are seen frequently in secondary care. Where prescriptions are issued from primary care the indication for the prescription is not available and we can therefore not confirm that the prescription is for the treatment of AA.

Plans for dissemination

We plan to publish the final study results in peer-reviewed journals and present early findings at scientific meetings.

Conclusions

This study series aims to provide the first large scale population-based analysis of the epidemiology of AA in the UK and the current patterns of healthcare utilisation and treatments in this group. We also aim to provide an extensive assessment of the association between common mental health conditions and work-related difficulties in people with AA; reporting the prevalence and incidence of these conditions in people with new onset AA and matched controls. We aim to provide an extensive evaluation of the prevalence and incidence of autoimmune and atopic conditions in people with new onset AA and matched controls. Finally, we aim to provide evidence for baseline common infection risk in people with AA which can be used to support treatment decisions regarding the use of immune-modulating medications for AA. This study series will extend our knowledge of the current disease burden from AA and associated conditions. This study series aims to provide the first large scale population-based analysis of the epidemiology of AA in the UK and the current patterns of healthcare utilisation and treatments in this group. We also aim to provide an extensive assessment of the association between common mental health conditions and work-related difficulties in people with AA; reporting the prevalence and incidence of these conditions in people with new onset AA and matched controls. We aim to provide an extensive evaluation of the prevalence and incidence of autoimmune and atopic conditions in people with new onset AA and matched controls. Finally, we aim to provide evidence for baseline common infection risk in people with AA which can be used to support treatment decisions regarding the use of immune-modulating medications for AA. This study series will extend our knowledge of the current disease burden from AA and associated conditions. 

Declarations Patient and Public Involvement statement

The design of this protocol did not involve patients or this public.

Ethics approval and dissemination

The study does not require formal research ethics committee (REC) approval as it will use anonymised routinely collected healthcare data; as defined by the NHS Health Research Authority research decision tool (http://www.hradecisiontools.org.uk/research/) and the University of Surrey own Self-Assessment for Governance and Ethics (SAGE) tool. No patient identifiable information will be available to researchers. All participating practices display information to patients regarding data use through the RCGP RSC network. All patients who choose to opt out of data sharing do not have their data processed as part of RCGP RSC research studies. Approval for data access and use was granted by the RCGP and RSC Research Committee.

Consent for publication

Not applicable 

Availability of data and materials

The RCGP RSC dataset can be accessed by bone fide researchers, approval is on a project-by-project basis (www.rcgp.org.uk/rsc). Researchers wishing to directly analyse the patient-level pseudonymised data will be required to complete information governance training and work on the data from the secure servers at the University of Surrey or University of Oxford. Patient-level data cannot be taken out of the secure networks.The RCGP RSC dataset can be accessed by bone fide researchers, approval is on a project-by-project basis (www.rcgp.org.uk/rsc). Researchers wishing to directly analyse the patient-level pseudonymised data will be required to complete information governance training and work on the data from the secure servers at the University of Surrey or University of Oxford. Patient-level data cannot be taken out of the secure networks.

Competing interests

SdeL is Director of RCGP RSC, he has received funding for projects from Eli Lilly, SdeL 

Funding statement

This research was sponsored and funded by Pfizer (grant number N/A).This research was sponsored and funded by Pfizer.

Authors' contributions

The study was designed and developed by CT, MH, SH, ART, AEM, WSC, WRG, and AGM with input from SdeL. The protocol writing was directed and critically reviewed by CT, MH, SH, ART, AEM, WSC, WRG, SdeL, and AGM. Tables   Table 1. The autoimmune and atopic conditions to be explored. For full  definitions see Supplementary Tables S4.1 -S4. 16 Table 2 . The common infections to be explored. *Inclusion of COVID-19 will depend on data availability.The study was designed and developed by CT, MH, SH, ART, AEM, WSC, WRG, and AGM with input from SdeL. The protocol writing was directed and critically reviewed by CT, MH, SH, ART, AEM, WSC, WRG, SdeL, and AGM. ................................................................................................................................... ..................................................................... 

Infection Description Upper respiratory tract infection

All infections of the upper respiratory tract including rhinitis, pharyngitis, sinusitis, and the common cold Lower respiratory tract infection All infection of the lower respiratory tract including pneumonia and acute bronchitis.

Pneumonia

A subgroup of LRTI consisting of bacterial and viral pneumonias Acute bronchitis A subgroup of LRTI consisting of inflammation of the large and medium airways usually of viral origin InfluenzaConfirmed cases of influenza and cases of influenza-like illness

Skin infection Cellulitis and other infective skin conditions Urinary tract infection

Infections of the urinary tract including cystitis and pyelonephritis

Genital infections

All infections of the genital tract including sexually transmitted infections and nonsexually transmitted infections

Gastrointestinal infection

All infections of the gastrointestinal tract including gastroenteritis Herpes simplex

Mucocutaneous infections caused but herpes simplex viruses Herpes zoster

Infections caused by the varicella-zoster virus MeningitisAll infections, bacterial or viral, causing meningitis COVID- 19 Confirmed or clinically diagnosed COVID-19* 

Background

Alopecia areata (AA) is a common cause of immune-mediated, non-scarring hair loss. (1) Clinical presentations of AA are heterogeneous, ranging from well-demarcated patches of hair loss on the scalp to total loss of hair on the scalp (alopecia areata totalis) or entire scalp and body (alopecia areata universalis). (2) Active AA is estimated to affect approximately 0.1-0.2% (2, 3) of the population worldwide, with a lifetime risk of 1.0 -2.1%. (4) (5) (6) Following the initial episode, the majority of those with limited patchy AA will experience spontaneous remission, but over 80% will have subsequent relapses. (7) Spontaneous remission has been reported to occur in less than 10% of those with extensive AA. (7) A number of treatment options can induce hair growth in people with AA, but none have been shown to have a durable impact on remission. (8) AA has been associated with several autoimmune conditions supporting the theory of an underlying autoimmune aetiology. (9, 10) Atopic conditions and mental health disorders have also been demonstrated to be more common in people with AA, (9) (10) (11) although the temporal relationship between psychiatric conditions and AA remains poorly researched. (12) The association between AA and common infections is not well studied.Alopecia areata (AA) is a common cause of immune-mediated, non-scarring hair loss. (1) Clinical presentations of AA are heterogeneous, ranging from well-demarcated patches of hair loss on the scalp to total loss of hair on the scalp (alopecia areata totalis) or entire scalp and body (alopecia areata universalis). (2) Active AA is estimated to affect approximately 0.1-0.2% (2, 3)of the population worldwide, with a lifetime risk of 1.0 -2.1%. (4) (5) (6) Following the initial episode, the majority of those with limited patchy AA will experience spontaneous remission, but over 80% will have subsequent relapses. (7) Spontaneous remission has been reported to occur in less than 10% of those with extensive AA. (7) A number of treatment options can induce hair growth in people with AA, but none have been shown to have a durable impact on remission. (8) AA has been associated with several autoimmune conditions supporting the theory of an underlying autoimmune aetiology. (9, 10) Atopic conditions and mental health disorders have also been demonstrated to be more common in people with AA, (9) (10) (11) although the temporal relationship between psychiatric conditions and AA remains poorly researched. (12) The association between AA and common infections is not well studied.

Purposes of analyses

This statistical analysis plan covers four related AA studies.This statistical analysis plan covers four related AA studies.

Study 1: Epidemiology of AA

Population studies in the USA using the Rochester Epidemiology Project database estimate the lifetime risk of AA to be 2.1%. (4) The database contained information from all patients registered with a healthcare provider in Olmstead County, Minnesota from 1990-2009. Previous studies using this database from 1971-1974 estimated the overall prevalence of AA to be 0.1-0.2%, (13) with no published studies reporting prevalence estimates since this. Other epidemiological studies have assessed the incidence of AA in patients referred to dermatology services. Clinic-based studies from around the world have estimated the incidence of AA to be in the region of 0.57-3.8%. (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) Worldwide, the majority of studies on AA have not found a significant difference in incidence between males and females. (5) AA onset occurs before the age of 40 in 82-86% of cases. (5) To date, there have been no large population-based studies of AA epidemiology in UK populations.Population studies in the USA using the Rochester Epidemiology Project database estimate the lifetime risk of AA to be 2.1%. (4) The database contained information from all patients registered with a healthcare provider in Olmstead County, Minnesota from 1990-2009. Previous studies using this database from 1971-1974 estimated the overall prevalence of AA to be 0.1-0.2%, (13) with no published studies reporting prevalence estimates since this. Other epidemiological studies have assessed the incidence of AA in patients referred to dermatology services. Clinic-based studies from around the world have estimated the incidence of AA to be in the region of 0.57-3.8%. (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) Worldwide, the majority of studies on AA have not found a significant difference in incidence between males and females. (5) There has also been interest in the prevalence of co-morbid atopy in patients with AA. The prevalence of atopy in patients with AA has been reported to be in the range of 11-38.2% (5) representing cohorts from the USA, India and Singapore. (10, 14, 28, 29) A large metaanalysis found patients with AA had higher odds of having atopic dermatitis (OR 2.36; 95%CI 1.80-3.09) and allergic rhinitis (OR 1.33;95%CI 1.19-1.47) when compared with controls. (9) It is not however surprising from a pathogenesis perspective in terms of shared pathways of autoimmune susceptibility; IL-13 loci have been associated with autoimmune and atopic conditions, and a genome-wide association study established that IL-13 is also susceptible loci for AA. (30)

Study 2: Mental health comorbidities in patients with AA

It is well recognised by clinical experts in AA that the condition can have a profound psychological impact and a possible comorbid burden of mental health conditions. A recent USA cross-sectional database study comparing 5,605 patients with AA with matched controls found a higher prevalence of mental health diagnoses in the AA group (32.8% vs 20.0%). (19) In particular, higher rates of depression ( 59-15.35) were observed when compared with controls. (19) These findings concur with previous work and a similar pattern is seen in other countries. (20) (21) (22) (23) Recently a British study identified a bi-directional positive association between major depressive disorder and AA. (24) In a sample of over 400,000 participants, major depressive disorder was seen to increase the risk of incident AA by 90% [HR 1.90, 95%CI 1. 67-2.15] and AA was found to increase the risk of incident major depressive disorder by 34% [HR 1.34, 95%CI 1. 23-1.46] . (24) The association of other common mental health conditions with AA however was not assessed.

Study 3: Autoimmune and atopic conditions in people with AA

A central theory in AA pathogenesis is that it is an autoimmune phenomenon resulting from a disruption of hair follicle 'immune privilege', where numerous immunological mechanisms fail to prevent cytotoxic immune attack on cells and antigens present at that site. (25) A number of studies have reported autoimmune conditions to occur more frequently in those with AA than in the general population, however results are conflicting, and studies have been limited by potential recruiting, recall and reporting biases. ( (27) There was no relationship between AA and Hashimoto's thyroiditis or type 1 diabetes (T1DM). A large USA crosssectional study of 3,658 individuals with AA, found that 14.6% had a diagnosis of thyroid disease, 11.1% had T1DM, 4.3% had inflammatory bowel disease, 2.8% had vitligo and 6.3% had psoriasis. (10) These figures were all higher than would be expected in the general population. A recent systematic review and meta-analysis found AA to be significantly associated with Graves' Disease (OR 2.07, 95%CI 1.80-2.38) and Hashimoto's Thyroiditis (OR 2.15; 95%CI 1.71-2.72) but not with SLE, RA, Psoriasis or T1DM. (9) There has also been interest in the prevalence of co-morbid atopy in patients with AA. The prevalence of atopy in patients with AA has been reported to be in the range of 11-38.2% (5) representing cohorts from the USA, India and Singapore. (10, 14, 28, 29) A large metaanalysis found patients with AA had higher odds of having atopic dermatitis (OR 2.36; 95%CI 1.80-3.09) and allergic rhinitis (OR 1.33;95%CI 1.19-1.47) when compared with controls. (9) It is not however surprising from a pathogenesis perspective in terms of shared pathways of autoimmune susceptibility; IL-13 loci have been associated with autoimmune and atopic conditions, and a genome-wide association study established that IL-13 is also susceptible loci for AA. (30)

Study 4: Common infections in people with AA

It has been hypothesized that infections may act as triggers for AA; with particular interest in Helicobacter pylori, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and human immunodeficiency virus but others have also been suggested. (9, (31) (32) (33) (34) (35) (36) (37) (38) Some case reports has suggested improvement or resolution of AA with treatment of the associated infection. (33, 39) . However, early small-scale studies have failed to find convincing evidence to support associations. (35, 36, 40) Multiple genetic loci have been identified to be both protective from infection but increase the risk for autoimmune disease. (41) Examples include the HLA variants HLA-DQ2 and HLA-DQ8 which confer protection against viral infections including influenza but are associated with inflammatory bowel disease, (42, 43) and SH2B3 rs3184504*A gene variant protective against Escherichia coli infection but also detrimental for inflammatory bowel disease. (44) These loci which, in the past have conferred a genetic advantage, may still confer a reduced infection risk. (41) It is currently unclear if the genetic predisposition for AA is caused by genetic factors which also confer protection against any common infections. In other autoimmune conditions, infection risk is often increased as a result of the pathological changes resulting from the condition itself, the effects of immune-modulatory treatment, or through increased exposure to pathogens through healthcare contact. (45) (46) (47) (48) (49) (50) (51) An understanding of the relative infection rates in people with AA compared to those without is of particular importance with the emergence of Janus kinase inhibitors as a potential treatment option. (52) Whilst this medication class can produce impressive hair regrowth results even in long-standing, AA their use is associated with some increased infection risk; in particular, urinary tract infections, viral gastroenteritis fungal infections, and varicella zoster infection. (52) It has been hypothesized that infections may act as triggers for AA; with particular interest in Helicobacter pylori, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and human immunodeficiency virus but others have also been suggested. (9, (31) (32) (33) (34) (35) (36) (37) (38) Some case reports has suggested improvement or resolution of AA with treatment of the associated infection. (33, 39) . However, early small-scale studies have failed to find convincing evidence to support associations. (35, 36, 40) Multiple genetic loci have been identified to be both protective from infection but increase the risk for autoimmune disease. (41) Examples include the HLA variants HLA-DQ2 and HLA-DQ8 which confer protection against viral infections including influenza but are associated with inflammatory bowel disease, (42, 43) and SH2B3 rs3184504*A gene variant protective against Escherichia coli infection but also detrimental for inflammatory bowel disease. (44) These loci which, in the past have conferred a genetic advantage, may still confer a reduced infection risk. (41) It is currently unclear if the genetic predisposition for AA is caused by genetic factors which also confer protection against any common infections. In other autoimmune conditions, infection risk is often increased as a result of the pathological changes resulting from the condition itself, the effects of immune-modulatory treatment, or through increased exposure to pathogens through healthcare contact. (45) (46) (47) (48) (49) (50) (51) An understanding of the relative infection rates in people with AA compared to those without is of particular importance with the emergence of Janus kinase inhibitors as a potential treatment option. (52) Whilst this medication class can produce impressive hair regrowth results even in long-standing, AA their use is associated with some increased infection risk; in particular, urinary tract infections, viral gastroenteritis fungal infections, and varicella zoster infection. (52) 

Study objectiv es and endpoints 2.1 Study objectiv es 2.1.1 Study 1

The overall purpose of study 1 is to describe the epidemiology (incidence and prevalence) of AA and to assess the current level of primary care service utilisation and management patterns associated with people diagnosed with AA.The overall purpose of study 1 is to describe the epidemiology (incidence and prevalence) of AA and to assess the current level of primary care service utilisation and management patterns associated with people diagnosed with AA.

Study 2

The overall purpose of study 2 is to assess the prevalence and incidence of mental health conditions (depressive episodes, recurrent depressive disorder and anxiety disorder) in adult people diagnosed with AA relative to a control population of people without a diagnosis of AA. In addition, the study will determine the treatment burden (medications and psychological interventions used to treat mental health conditions), 'sick day' burden, and unemployment burden of AA.Assuming 80% power, a 5% level of statistical significance, and a background population prevalence of 15% for anxiety and 10% for depression, (64) our anticipated sample size for AA (n = 4,000) would be sufficient to detect a prevalence difference of 1.8% in anxiety between those with and without AA, and 1.5% difference in depression between those with and without AA.Prevalence of mental health conditions: Prevalence will be calculated by dividing the number of prevalent people at the study start date by the total number of eligible people in the study population at the same time point.The prevalence of each common mental health condition (depressive episodes, recurrent depressive disorder and anxiety disorder) category for people diagnosed with AA will be reported in Study 2 and compared to the prevalence in the control population without AA. The prevalence of mental health conditions by socio-demographic subgroups will also be reported.Incidence of mental health conditions: Incident cases will be defined as in Study 1. Incidence rates of mental health conditions (depressive episodes, recurrent depressive disorder and anxiety disorder) within two years of diagnosis date (matched follow-up start date for controls) will be calculated in both cases and controls and compared.Risk of developing a mental health condition (grouped by mental health condition category) will be examined using time to failure analysis. Initially, unadjusted Cox proportional hazards models, stratified by matched set (AA versus non-AA), will be used to provide overall hazard ratios (HRs) as summary estimates for the association of the presence of AA with the time to each mental health condition category in separate models. Models will be subsequently adjusted for standard set factors (section 6.1) and comorbidities (type 2 diabetes (T2DM), hypertension, atrial fibrillation, angina, acute myocardial infarction, stroke, heart failure, chronic liver disease, dementia, RA, asthma, Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, Chronic Kidney Disease stage 3-5 (CKD), malignancy and inflammatory bowel disease) in multivariable analysis.Mental health treatment and management patterns: The burden of treatment for mental health conditions will be evaluated as the total percentage of people diagnosed with AA and prescribed, within one year of AA diagnosis, a medication used to treat mental health conditions (section 3.8) (e.g. SSRIs), grouped by mental health condition category.Management patterns will be evaluated by calculation of annual proportion of people referred for psychiatrist referral and counselling in people diagnosed with AA in the year following diagnosis (Supplementary Table S2 .10, Additional file 2).Stratified prevalence of mental health conditions: The prevalence of mental health conditions (depressive episodes, recurrent depressive disorder and anxiety disorder) by sociodemographic subgroups will also be reported in both cases and controls. Additional mental health conditions: The prevalence of additional mental health conditions (adjustment disorder, agoraphobia, self-harm, and overdose/parasuicide attempts) will be estimated as the total percentage of people diagnosed with AA and with the presence of one or more diagnosis codes appearing in the clinical record Sick day and unemployment burden: The burden of sick days will be estimated as the total percentage of people diagnosed with AA and issued one or more Med 3certificate. The burden of unemployment will be estimated as the total percentage of people diagnosed with AA and with a Read code relating to unemployment recorded in the primary care record or an IB113 or ESA113 form issued.The overall purpose of study 2 is to assess the prevalence and incidence of mental health conditions (depressive episodes, recurrent depressive disorder and anxiety disorder) in adult people diagnosed with AA relative to a control population of people without a diagnosis of AA. In addition, the study will determine the treatment burden (medications and psychological interventions used to treat mental health conditions), 'sick day' burden, and unemployment burden of AA.Assuming 80% power, a 5% level of statistical significance, and a background population prevalence of 15% for anxiety and 10% for depression, (64) our anticipated sample size for AA (n = 4,000) would be sufficient to detect a prevalence difference of 1.8% in anxiety between those with and without AA, and 1.5% difference in depression between those with and without AA.Prevalence of mental health conditions: Prevalence will be calculated by dividing the number of prevalent people at the study start date by the total number of eligible people in the study population at the same time point.The prevalence of each common mental health condition (depressive episodes, recurrent depressive disorder and anxiety disorder) category for people diagnosed with AA will be reported in Study 2 and compared to the prevalence in the control population without AA. The prevalence of mental health conditions by socio-demographic subgroups will also be reported.Incidence of mental health conditions: Incident cases will be defined as in Study 1. Incidence rates of mental health conditions (depressive episodes, recurrent depressive disorder and anxiety disorder) within two years of diagnosis date (matched follow-up start date for controls) will be calculated in both cases and controls and compared.Risk of developing a mental health condition (grouped by mental health condition category) will be examined using time to failure analysis. Initially, unadjusted Cox proportional hazards models, stratified by matched set (AA versus non-AA), will be used to provide overall hazard ratios (HRs) as summary estimates for the association of the presence of AA with the time to each mental health condition category in separate models. Models will be subsequently adjusted for standard set factors (section 6.1) and comorbidities (type 2 diabetes (T2DM), hypertension, atrial fibrillation, angina, acute myocardial infarction, stroke, heart failure, chronic liver disease, dementia, RA, asthma, Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, Chronic Kidney Disease stage 3-5 (CKD), malignancy and inflammatory bowel disease) in multivariable analysis.Stratified prevalence of mental health conditions: The prevalence of mental health conditions (depressive episodes, recurrent depressive disorder and anxiety disorder) by sociodemographic subgroups will also be reported in both cases and controls. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y   20 Additional mental health conditions: The prevalence of additional mental health conditions (adjustment disorder, agoraphobia, self-harm, and overdose/parasuicide attempts) will be estimated as the total percentage of people diagnosed with AA and with the presence of one or more diagnosis codes appearing in the clinical record Sick day and unemployment burden: The burden of sick days will be estimated as the total percentage of people diagnosed with AA and issued one or more Med 3certificate. The burden of unemployment will be estimated as the total percentage of people diagnosed with AA and with a Read code relating to unemployment recorded in the primary care record or an IB113 or ESA113 form issued.

Study 3

The overall purpose of study 3 is to assess the prevalence and incidence of atopic and autoimmune conditions in adult people diagnosed with AA relative to a control population of people without AA.NoneA sample size calculation is applicable to estimate the incidence of atopic and autoimmune conditions in people diagnosed with AA. There is, however, a paucity of large-scale epidemiological data exploring the association between AA and either atopic or autoimmune conditions on which to base the sample size calculations for this study.A large population-based study based in Taiwan (65) 15 1,706 controls) would be required to detect statistically significant differences between people diagnosed with AA and the control populations.For the assessment of prevalence of co-existing autoimmune conditions, assuming 80% power, a 5% level of statistical significance, our anticipated sample size for AA (n = 4,000) and an OR 2.0 effect, we would have sufficient power to detect a difference between those with and without AA in autoimmune conditions having >= 0.3% background population prevalence.Prevalence of atopic and autoimmune conditions: The prevalence of atopic and autoimmune conditions in both cases and controls will be reported and compared.Incidence of atopic and autoimmune conditions: Incidence rates of atopic and autoimmune conditions within five years of diagnosis date (matched follow-up start date for controls) will be calculated in both cases and controls and compared.Risk of developing an atopic or autoimmune condition will be examined using time to failure analysis. Initially, unadjusted Cox proportional hazards models, stratified by matched set (AA versus non-AA), will be used to provide overall HRs as summary estimates for the association of the presence of AA with the time to each of atopic and autoimmune conditions in separate models. Models will be subsequently adjusted for standard set factors (section 6.1) and comorbidities (hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, T2DM, peripheral arterial disease, atrial fibrillation, angina, myocardial infarction, stroke, heart failure, CKD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder (COPD), chronic liver disease, malignancy, dementia, fracture history, depression) in multivariable analysis.Not applicable.The overall purpose of study 3 is to assess the prevalence and incidence of atopic and autoimmune conditions in adult people diagnosed with AA relative to a control population of people without AA.NoneA sample size calculation is applicable to estimate the incidence of atopic and autoimmune conditions in people diagnosed with AA. There is, however, a paucity of large-scale epidemiological data exploring the association between AA and either atopic or autoimmune conditions on which to base the sample size calculations for this study.A large population-based study based in Taiwan (65) found associations between the presence of AA and the presence of atopic dermatitis (OR 2.24, 95% CI 1.95-2.58) and allergic rhinitis (OR 1.29, 95% CI 1.18-1.41), and with the autoimmune condition psoriasis (OR 2.80, 95% CI 2.24-3.50). No associations were found in either asthma (atopic) or RA (autoimmune). Applying an estimate informed by this study of OR 2.0 for atopic conditions and OR 2.8 for autoimmune conditions, assuming 80% power, a 5% level of statistical significance, a 4:1 ratio of controls to cases and a probability of outcome in the control cohort of 1% (less common condition prevalence) for both atopic and autoimmune conditions, a total (both cases and controls) sample size of 6,034 for atopic conditions (1,207 cases and 4,827 controls) and 2,133 for autoimmune conditions (427 cases and 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y   15 1,706 controls) would be required to detect statistically significant differences between people diagnosed with AA and the control populations.For the assessment of prevalence of co-existing autoimmune conditions, assuming 80% power, a 5% level of statistical significance, our anticipated sample size for AA (n = 4,000) and an OR 2.0 effect, we would have sufficient power to detect a difference between those with and without AA in autoimmune conditions having >= 0.3% background population prevalence.Prevalence of atopic and autoimmune conditions: The prevalence of atopic and autoimmune conditions in both cases and controls will be reported and compared.Incidence of atopic and autoimmune conditions: Incidence rates of atopic and autoimmune conditions within five years of diagnosis date (matched follow-up start date for controls) will be calculated in both cases and controls and compared.Risk of developing an atopic or autoimmune condition will be examined using time to failure analysis. Initially, unadjusted Cox proportional hazards models, stratified by matched set (AA versus non-AA), will be used to provide overall HRs as summary estimates for the association of the presence of AA with the time to each of atopic and autoimmune conditions in separate models. Models will be subsequently adjusted for standard set factors (section 6.1) and comorbidities (hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, T2DM, peripheral arterial disease, atrial fibrillation, angina, myocardial infarction, stroke, heart failure, CKD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder (COPD), chronic liver disease, malignancy, dementia, fracture history, depression) in multivariable analysis.Not applicable.

Study 4

The overall purpose of study 4 is to assess the incidence of common infections in people diagnosed with AA relative to a control population of people without AA. None A sample size calculation is applicable to estimate the incidence of common infections in people diagnosed with AA. There is, however, no previous data exploring the association between AA and common infections on which to base the sample size calculations for this study. We therefore estimate the number of people diagnosed with AA we will have for this study (n = 4,000) and use this number to estimate the minimum effect size we are powered to detect. Based on a Cox PH model, 80% power, a 5% level of statistical significance and a 4:1 ratio of controls to cases, we would have sufficient power to detect a difference between those with and without AA in common infections having >= 0.46% background population prevalence.Incidence of common infections: Incidence rates of common infections within five years of diagnosis date (matched follow-up start date for controls) will be calculated at both overall and individual infection levels in both cases and controls and compared. : Initially, infection incidence rates in people with and without AA will be estimated by dividing the number of incident common infections by the sum of person-years of follow-up for each cohort over the period of interest. Unadjusted Poisson regression models, stratified by matched set (AA versus controls), will be used to provide overall incident rate ratios as summary estimates for the association between rates of common infections and the presence of AA. Models will subsequently be adjusted for standard set factors (section 6.1) and comorbidities (hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, T2DM, peripheral arterial disease, atrial fibrillation, angina, myocardial infarction, stroke, heart failure, CKD, COPD, chronic liver disease, malignancy, dementia, RA, depression).Not applicable.The overall purpose of study 4 is to assess the incidence of common infections in people diagnosed with AA relative to a control population of people without AA. None A sample size calculation is applicable to estimate the incidence of common infections in people diagnosed with AA. There is, however, no previous data exploring the association between AA and common infections on which to base the sample size calculations for this study. We therefore estimate the number of people diagnosed with AA we will have for this study (n = 4,000) and use this number to estimate the minimum effect size we are powered to detect. Based on a Cox PH model, 80% power, a 5% level of statistical significance and a 4:1 ratio of controls to cases, we would have sufficient power to detect a difference between those with and without AA in common infections having >= 0.46% background population prevalence.Incidence of common infections: Incidence rates of common infections within five years of diagnosis date (matched follow-up start date for controls) will be calculated at both overall and individual infection levels in both cases and controls and compared. : Initially, infection incidence rates in people with and without AA will be estimated by dividing the number of incident common infections by the sum of person-years of follow-up for each cohort over the period of interest. Unadjusted Poisson regression models, stratified by matched set (AA versus controls), will be used to provide overall incident rate ratios as summary estimates for the association between rates of common infections and the presence of AA. Models will subsequently be adjusted for standard set factors (section 6.1) and comorbidities (hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, T2DM, peripheral arterial disease, atrial fibrillation, angina, myocardial infarction, stroke, heart failure, CKD, COPD, chronic liver disease, malignancy, dementia, RA, depression).Not applicable.

2.2.1.1

Describe the epidemiology of AA: Incidence of AA over time and by age, sex, ethnicity, and sociodemographic factors, and point prevalence by age and sex.

2.2.1.2

Describe current primary care service utilisation and management patterns in AA.Describe current primary care service utilisation and management patterns in AA.

2.2.2.1

Describe the prevalence of common mental health conditions (depressive episodes, recurrent depressive disorder and anxiety disorder) in adult people diagnosed with AA in a contemporary real-world population compared with matched controls without AA.Describe the prevalence of common mental health conditions (depressive episodes, recurrent depressive disorder and anxiety disorder) in adult people diagnosed with AA in a contemporary real-world population compared with matched controls without AA.

2.2.2.2

Describe the incidence of common mental health conditions (depressive episodes, recurrent depressive disorder and anxiety disorder) in adult people diagnosed with AA in a contemporary real-world population compared with matched controls in the first two years after AA diagnosis.Describe the incidence of common mental health conditions (depressive episodes, recurrent depressive disorder and anxiety disorder) in adult people diagnosed with AA in a contemporary real-world population compared with matched controls in the first two years after AA diagnosis.

2.2.2.3

Describe the mental health treatment burden of adult people diagnosed with AA.Describe the mental health treatment burden of adult people diagnosed with AA.

2.2.3.1

Describe the prevalence of atopic and autoimmune conditions in adult people diagnosed with AA in a contemporary real-world population at diagnosis compared with matched controls without AA.Describe the prevalence of atopic and autoimmune conditions in adult people diagnosed with AA in a contemporary real-world population at diagnosis compared with matched controls without AA.

2.2.3.2

Describe the incidence of atopic and autoimmune conditions in adult people with AA in a contemporary real-world population compared with matched controls in the first five years after AA diagnosis.Describe the incidence of atopic and autoimmune conditions in adult people with AA in a contemporary real-world population compared with matched controls in the first five years after AA diagnosis.

2.2.4.1

Describe the overall rate of common infections in people with AA in a contemporary realworld population at diagnosis compared with matched controls in the first five years after AA diagnosis. Describe the rates of individual common infections in people with AA in a contemporary real-world population at diagnosis compared with matched controls in the first five years after AA diagnosis.Describe the overall rate of common infections in people with AA in a contemporary realworld population at diagnosis compared with matched controls in the first five years after AA diagnosis. Describe the rates of individual common infections in people with AA in a contemporary real-world population at diagnosis compared with matched controls in the first five years after AA diagnosis. 

2.3.1.1

Describe the geographic distribution of AA incidence within England. English regions comprise; Greater London, South East, South West, West Midlands, North West, North East, Yorkshire and the Humber, East Midlands, and East of England.

2.3.2.1

Describe the prevalence of additional mental health conditions (adjustment disorder, agoraphobia, self-harm, and overdose/parasuicide attempts) in adult people diagnosed with AA and controls.Describe the prevalence of additional mental health conditions (adjustment disorder, agoraphobia, self-harm, and overdose/parasuicide attempts) in adult people diagnosed with AA and controls.

2.3.2.2

Describe the burden of 'sick days' in adult people diagnosed with AA and controls.Describe the burden of 'sick days' in adult people diagnosed with AA and controls.

2.3.2.3

Describe the prevalence of unemployment in adult people diagnosed with AA and controls.Describe the prevalence of unemployment in adult people diagnosed with AA and controls.

Primary endpoint

The primary endpoints for the four studies are listed in Table 1 .The primary endpoints for the four studies are listed in Table 1 . 

Study Endpoints 1

Diagnosis of AA is the date of the first diagnosis code in the record and no alternative diagnosis that merits exclusion* diagnosed in the subsequent 365 days from date of AA diagnosis (see Supplementary Table S1 .1, Additional file 2).

2

Diagnosis of AA is the date of the first diagnosis code in the record and no alternative diagnosis that merits exclusion* diagnosed in the subsequent 365 days from date of AA diagnosis (see Supplementary Table S1 .1, Additional file 2).Diagnosis of a common mental health condition categorized as depressive episodes, recurrent depressive disorder or non-phobia related anxiety disorders at the time of AA diagnosis (See Supplementary Tables S2.1 -S2 . 4 , Additional file 2).Time to diagnosis of a common mental health condition categorized as depressive episodes, recurrent depressive disorder or non-phobia related anxiety disorders in the first two years post AA diagnosis (See Supplementary Tables S2.1 

-S2.4, Additional file 2)

3 Diagnosis of AA is the date of the first diagnosis code in the record and no alternative diagnosis that merits exclusion* diagnosed in the subsequent 365 days from date of AA diagnosis (see Supplementary Table S1 .1, Additional file 2).Diagnosis of an atopic (atopic dermatitis, allergic rhinitis, asthma) or autoimmune condition (Supplementary Tables S4.1 -S4 . 16 , Additional file 2) at the time of AA diagnosis.Time to diagnosis of an atopic (atopic dermatitis, allergic rhinitis, asthma) or autoimmune condition (Supplementary Tables S4.1 -S4 . 16 , Additional file 2) in the first five years after AA diagnosis.

4

Diagnosis of AA is the date of the first diagnosis code in the record and no alternative diagnosis that merits exclusion* diagnosed in the subsequent 365 days from date of AA diagnosis (see Supplementary Table S1 

Other exploratory analyses

Study 1: Explore the incidence of AA by age (children) and age group (adults (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) (23) (24) (25) (26) (27) (28) (29) (30) , (30) (31) (32) (33) (34) (35) (36) (37) (38) (39) (40) , (50) (51) (52) (53) (54) (55) (56) (57) (58) (59) (60) , (60,70], (70-80], ≥80). These age groups are provisional. If, during exploratory analysis, we find that these age groups obscure the true incidence of AA (for example if AA incidence rates change substantially across one of these age groups) then we may modify these groupings. Any changes will be clearly stated as such in a final manuscript.Study 1: Explore the incidence of AA by age (children) and age group (adults (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) (23) (24) (25) (26) (27) (28) (29) (30) , (30) (31) (32) (33) (34) (35) (36) (37) (38) (39) (40) , (50) (51) (52) (53) (54) (55) (56) (57) (58) (59) (60) , (60,70], (70-80], ≥80). These age groups are provisional. If, during exploratory analysis, we find that these age groups obscure the true incidence of AA (for example if AA incidence rates change substantially across one of these age groups) then we may modify these groupings. Any changes will be clearly stated as such in a final manuscript.

General Study Design and P lan

The proposed studies will use the retrospectively collected data of all eligible patients within Oxford-Royal College of General Practitioners Research and Surveillance Centre database (RCGP RSC) at the date of data extraction. The RCGP RSC database incorporates pseudonymised primary care records from up to 200 GP practices distributed across England. Details of the cohort included in the database have been published previously. (54) The RCGP RSC cohort size (as of January 2019) is over 2.6 million actively registered patients, and historic records available for up to 5.2 million patients over the last 20 years.The cohort provides a broadly representative sample of the UK population.The study period for study 2 and study 3 incidence analyses will be ten-years starting January 1, 2009 and ending December 31, 2018 inclusive.For study 4, we will start data collection from the beginning of 2004 when the quality and outcomes framework was first introduced in primary care. The study period will end December 31, 2018.The proposed studies will use the retrospectively collected data of all eligible patients within Oxford-Royal College of General Practitioners Research and Surveillance Centre database (RCGP RSC) at the date of data extraction. The RCGP RSC database incorporates pseudonymised primary care records from up to 200 GP practices distributed across England. Details of the cohort included in the database have been published previously. (54) The RCGP RSC cohort size (as of January 2019) is over 2.6 million actively registered patients, and historic records available for up to 5.2 million patients over the last 20 years.The cohort provides a broadly representative sample of the UK population.The study period for study 2 and study 3 incidence analyses will be ten-years starting January 1, 2009 and ending December 31, 2018 inclusive.For study 4, we will start data collection from the beginning of 2004 when the quality and outcomes framework was first introduced in primary care. The study period will end December 31, 2018.

Study Design

These are non-interventional studies. A range of study designs will be used across the studies as follows:These are non-interventional studies. A range of study designs will be used across the studies as follows:

Study 1:

Cross-sectional design (incidence and prevalence of AA). Cohort design to assess healthcare utilisation in people with AA.Cross-sectional design (incidence and prevalence of AA). Cohort design to assess healthcare utilisation in people with AA.

Study 2:

Case-control design for prevalence of mental health conditions (depressive episodes, recurrent depressive disorder and anxiety disorder) at AA diagnosis. Matched-cohort design for incidence of such conditions in the first two years after AA diagnosis in the subset of adult people diagnosed with AA without a mental health condition at baseline (and excluding controls if they have a baseline mental health condition).Case-control design for prevalence of mental health conditions (depressive episodes, recurrent depressive disorder and anxiety disorder) at AA diagnosis. Matched-cohort design for incidence of such conditions in the first two years after AA diagnosis in the subset of adult people diagnosed with AA without a mental health condition at baseline (and excluding controls if they have a baseline mental health condition).

Study 3:

Case-control design for prevalence of atopic and autoimmune conditions at AA diagnosis. Matched-cohort design for incidence of atopic and autoimmune conditions in the first five years after AA diagnosis in the subset of adult people diagnosed with AA without an atopic/autoimmune condition at baseline (and excluding controls if they have a baseline atopic/autoimmune condition). Case-control design for prevalence of atopic and autoimmune conditions at AA diagnosis. Matched-cohort design for incidence of atopic and autoimmune conditions in the first five years after AA diagnosis in the subset of adult people diagnosed with AA without an atopic/autoimmune condition at baseline (and excluding controls if they have a baseline atopic/autoimmune condition). 

Study 4:

Matched-cohort design for incidence of common infections in the first five years after AA diagnosis in the subset of people diagnosed with AA without a common infection at baseline (and excluding controls if they have a baseline common infection).Matched-cohort design for incidence of common infections in the first five years after AA diagnosis in the subset of people diagnosed with AA without a common infection at baseline (and excluding controls if they have a baseline common infection).

Data source and Read codes

The case and control cohorts will be identified from the RCGP RSC database. The RCGP RSC database contains complete data on all events and clinical entities coded in UK primary care. These include demographic information, clinical diagnoses, laboratory test results, primary care issued prescriptions, process of care codes (e.g. specialist dermatology reviews), and anthropometric measurements (e.g., body mass index (BMI)), and are coded using the Read Coding system. (55) Read code lists used to define variables have been developed in accordance with published guidelines. (55)The case and control cohorts will be identified from the RCGP RSC database. The RCGP RSC database contains complete data on all events and clinical entities coded in UK primary care. These include demographic information, clinical diagnoses, laboratory test results, primary care issued prescriptions, process of care codes (e.g. specialist dermatology reviews), and anthropometric measurements (e.g., body mass index (BMI)), and are coded using the Read Coding system. (55) Read code lists used to define variables have been developed in accordance with published guidelines. (55)

Data extraction

Individual patient data will be anonymised at the point of data extraction. All data will remain in anonymised form and will be held on a secure server at the University of Surrey. The data will not be used for any purposes other than for the research which is described in the respective protocols and which has been approved by the RCGP RSC Research Committee. The sponsor, Pfizer Ltd, will not have access to the individual anonymised patient data. Queries will be executed to extract relevant data from the Structured Query Language (SQL) database using the Read code listed in Additional file 2.Individual patient data will be anonymised at the point of data extraction. All data will remain in anonymised form and will be held on a secure server at the University of Surrey. The data will not be used for any purposes other than for the research which is described in the respective protocols and which has been approved by the RCGP RSC Research Committee. The sponsor, Pfizer Ltd, will not have access to the individual anonymised patient data. Queries will be executed to extract relevant data from the Structured Query Language (SQL) database using the Read code listed in Additional file 2.

AA definition

We will identify people diagnosed with AA using diagnosis Read codes which are specific to the condition (see Supplementary Table S1 .1 (AA section), Additional file 2). A person will be considered to have a confirmed AA diagnosis if they have one or more of these diagnoses Read codes and no code for an alternative diagnosis in the subsequent 365 days. Alternative diagnoses which merit exclusion comprise any form of scarring alopecia, (53) traction alopecia, congenital alopecia, androgenetic alopecia, telogen effluvium, tinea capitis, trichotillomania, or secondary syphilis of the scalp (see Supplementary Table S1 .1, Additional file 2). We will identify all incident cases of AA meeting this case definition over the study period which will form the case cohorts for the four studies. We will also extract data on the extent of the alopecia where this has been recorded (See Supplementary Table  S1 Autoimmune conditions were selected based on a combination of expert knowledge and a minimum background population prevalence of 0.3% in the general population (refer to section 4.1.3). Case definition using Read codes for atopic dermatitis has been previously validated. An ontologically driven case definition is used for both allergic rhinitis and asthma. (55) Study 4 will identify common infections using diagnostic Read codes (Supplementary  Tables S5.1 -S5. 12, Additional file 2).We will identify people diagnosed with AA using diagnosis Read codes which are specific to the condition (see Supplementary Table S1 .1 (AA section), Additional file 2). A person will be considered to have a confirmed AA diagnosis if they have one or more of these diagnoses Read codes and no code for an alternative diagnosis in the subsequent 365 days. Alternative diagnoses which merit exclusion comprise any form of scarring alopecia, (53) traction alopecia, congenital alopecia, androgenetic alopecia, telogen effluvium, tinea capitis, trichotillomania, or secondary syphilis of the scalp (see Supplementary Table S1 .1, Additional file 2). We will identify all incident cases of AA meeting this case definition over the study period which will form the case cohorts for the four studies. We will also extract data on the extent of the alopecia where this has been recorded (See Supplementary Table  S1 .2, Additional file 2). Study 2 will identify three groups of common mental health conditions defined by the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems 10th Revision (ICD10) classification (56) (depressive episodes (F32), recurrent depressive disorder (F33), and non-phobia related anxiety disorders (F41)) identified using algorithms validated in UK primary care. (57) Study 3 will identify atopic conditions and autoimmune conditions respectively (Supplementary Tables S4.1 -S4 . 16 , Additional file 2) using diagnostic Read codes. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y   13 Autoimmune conditions were selected based on a combination of expert knowledge and a minimum background population prevalence of 0.3% in the general population (refer to section 4.1.3). Case definition using Read codes for atopic dermatitis has been previously validated. An ontologically driven case definition is used for both allergic rhinitis and asthma. (55) Study 4 will identify common infections using diagnostic Read codes (Supplementary  Tables S5.1 -S5. 12, Additional file 2).

Baseline socio-economic characteristics

Age, sex, socio-economic status (SES), and ethnicity will comprise the socio-economic factors used for stratification of the outcome measures. Ethnicity will be categorized as follows in accordance with the major UK census categories: (58, 59) White, Asian, Black African/Caribbean, Mixed, Other and not recorded. Deprivation will be defined using the official national deprivation measure; index of multiple deprivation (IMD). (60) This will be calculated at the point of data extraction, using patient postcode, with the resultant scores stratified by deprivation quintile according to the national distribution.Age, sex, socio-economic status (SES), and ethnicity will comprise the socio-economic factors used for stratification of the outcome measures. Ethnicity will be categorized as follows in accordance with the major UK census categories: (58, 59) White, Asian, Black African/Caribbean, Mixed, Other and not recorded. Deprivation will be defined using the official national deprivation measure; index of multiple deprivation (IMD). (60) This will be calculated at the point of data extraction, using patient postcode, with the resultant scores stratified by deprivation quintile according to the national distribution.

Epidemiology of AA

This will comprise of the incidence of AA over the study period (stratified by age group, sex ethnicity, and SES) and point prevalence (stratified by age and sex). The study will also describe the geographic distribution of AA by region across England.This will comprise of the incidence of AA over the study period (stratified by age group, sex ethnicity, and SES) and point prevalence (stratified by age and sex). The study will also describe the geographic distribution of AA by region across England.

Current serv ice utilisation and management patterns

Current service utilisation will comprise of annual primary care visit rates, in Study 1 we will compare primary care visit frequency in people with AA and matched controls without AA.The management patterns will comprise of an assessment of the percentage of the people with AA having a secondary care review (by dermatology (study 1) or mental health services (study 2)), and an assessment of primary care medication prescriptions issued to treat AA (Supplementary Table S1 .4, Additional file 2). Primary care visits, secondary care reviews and medication to treat AA will all be limited to those within 365 days of AA diagnosis.Current service utilisation will comprise of annual primary care visit rates, in Study 1 we will compare primary care visit frequency in people with AA and matched controls without AA.The management patterns will comprise of an assessment of the percentage of the people with AA having a secondary care review (by dermatology (study 1) or mental health services (study 2)), and an assessment of primary care medication prescriptions issued to treat AA (Supplementary Table S1 .4, Additional file 2). Primary care visits, secondary care reviews and medication to treat AA will all be limited to those within 365 days of AA diagnosis.

Mental health treatment, sick day, and unemployment burden

This will comprise of the rates for medications and psychological interventions used to treat mental health conditions in people diagnosed with AA. Antidepressant medication classes to be examined comprise; selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and related medications (serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors; SNRIs), tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and related medications (tetracyclic antidepressant TeCAs), and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MOAIs). Anxiolytic medications to be examined comprise all benzodiazepines and other related medications indicated for use in anxiety states. Psychological interventions comprise of will comprise; referral rates for counselling, secondary care psychiatrist referrals, including the referrals to the clinical psychology services/specialists and UK Improving Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT) program. Additional mental health conditions consist of adjustment disorder, agoraphobia, self-harm, and overdose/parasuicide attempts and will be identified using the presence of one or more diagnosis codes appearing in the clinical record (Supplementary Tables S2.5 -S2.9 , Additional file 2).Unemployment will be identified using Read codes relating to unemployment recorded in the primary care record or the issuing of IB113 or ESA113 forms (Supplementary Table S3 This will comprise of the rates for medications and psychological interventions used to treat mental health conditions in people diagnosed with AA. Antidepressant medication classes to be examined comprise; selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and related medications (serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors; SNRIs), tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and related medications (tetracyclic antidepressant TeCAs), and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MOAIs). Anxiolytic medications to be examined comprise all benzodiazepines and other related medications indicated for use in anxiety states. Psychological interventions comprise of will comprise; referral rates for counselling, secondary care psychiatrist referrals, including the referrals to the clinical psychology services/specialists and UK Improving Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT) program. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y   14 Additional mental health conditions consist of adjustment disorder, agoraphobia, self-harm, and overdose/parasuicide attempts and will be identified using the presence of one or more diagnosis codes appearing in the clinical record (Supplementary Tables S2.5 -S2.9, Additional file 2).Unemployment will be identified using Read codes relating to unemployment recorded in the primary care record or the issuing of IB113 or ESA113 forms (Supplementary Table S3 

Sample size calculations

In the controls, the prevalence of common conditions (e.g. depressive episodes) is assumed to be 10%, less common conditions are assumed to be 1% and rare conditions (e.g. multiple sclerosis) assumed to be 0.1%. Sample size calculations were performed in OpenEpi, (62) results are presented using methods of Kelsey.(63)In the controls, the prevalence of common conditions (e.g. depressive episodes) is assumed to be 10%, less common conditions are assumed to be 1% and rare conditions (e.g. multiple sclerosis) assumed to be 0.1%. Sample size calculations were performed in OpenEpi, (62) results are presented using methods of Kelsey.(63)

Study 1

The analysis of the primary endpoint is a descriptive analysis of the incidence and prevalence of AA, and no sample size calculation is therefore applicable.Our inclusion criteria specify all people with a confirmed diagnosis of AA will be included for analysis. The RCGP RSC database contains information on around 2 million actively registered patients. Based on an AA prevalence of 0.2% (13), we would anticipate a sample size of around 4,000 people diagnosed with AA for this study.AA incidence: Incident cases will be defined as people with a first ever diagnostic Read code for AA during the study period. To ensure cases are truly incident, people with an AA diagnosis within six months of registering with a practice will be excluded from the analysis (unless under one year old). Incidence of new onset AA will be calculated by dividing the total number of new cases by the total person-years of follow-up for the total eligible population over the study period. Incidence rates will be reported for the complete cohort and stratified by calendar year, sex and age (categorised), and SES factors. Adjusted incidence rates by socio-demographic factors (including geographic area classification) will be estimated using Poisson regression.AA point prevalence: Prevalence cases will be defined as all people with a historical diagnostic Read code for AA and no exclusion code within one year of AA diagnosis. For this prevalence analysis all people will be included regardless of the date of AA diagnosis in relation to the date of registration with a practice. Cases with < 365 days of follow up from date of registration will be excluded from the analysis (unless under one year old). Point prevalence will be calculated by dividing the number of prevalent cases by the total number of eligible people in the study population at the study end date (December 31, 2018). Point prevalence will be reported for the complete cohort and stratified by sex and age (categorised). We anticipate some attrition of recording of AA in the historic records. This is particularly likely to be the case in records preceding the computerisation of primary care which occurred in the 1990s. If we observe evidence of this being a major source of error in our point calculations (as evidenced by a falling point incidence in the older adult population despite there being a substantial number of incident diagnoses in this age group) then we will consider using the actuarial life table method to estimate lifetime AA risk (67) .Service utilisation and management patterns: Service utilisation will be evaluated by calculation of the annual rates of primary care visits for people diagnosed with AA in the year following diagnosis. Primary care visits will be identified from the patient's electronic health record.Management patterns will be evaluated by calculation of annual proportion of people referred for dermatology review in people diagnosed with AA in the year following diagnosis. Secondary care dermatology reviews will be identified from Read codes.In addition, management patterns will also comprise of the percentage of people diagnosed with AA and prescribed AA medication, in primary care, grouped by medication class during the year following diagnosis. Prescription information will be identified using Read and EMIS codes.Geographical distribution of AA: The geographic distribution of people with AA will be calculated from the disease incidence. The adjusted incident rate ratios will be reported. Models will be adjusted for age category, sex, ethnicity, IMD and geographic area classification derived using patient postcode at the point of data extraction.The analysis of the primary endpoint is a descriptive analysis of the incidence and prevalence of AA, and no sample size calculation is therefore applicable.Our inclusion criteria specify all people with a confirmed diagnosis of AA will be included for analysis. The RCGP RSC database contains information on around 2 million actively registered patients. Based on an AA prevalence of 0.2% (13), we would anticipate a sample size of around 4,000 people diagnosed with AA for this study.AA incidence: Incident cases will be defined as people with a first ever diagnostic Read code for AA during the study period. To ensure cases are truly incident, people with an AA diagnosis within six months of registering with a practice will be excluded from the analysis (unless under one year old). Incidence of new onset AA will be calculated by dividing the total number of new cases by the total person-years of follow-up for the total eligible population over the study period. Incidence rates will be reported for the complete cohort and stratified by calendar year, sex and age (categorised), and SES factors. Adjusted incidence rates by socio-demographic factors (including geographic area classification) will be estimated using Poisson regression.AA point prevalence: Prevalence cases will be defined as all people with a historical diagnostic Read code for AA and no exclusion code within one year of AA diagnosis. For this prevalence analysis all people will be included regardless of the date of AA diagnosis in relation to the date of registration with a practice. Cases with < 365 days of follow up from date of registration will be excluded from the analysis (unless under one year old). Point prevalence will be calculated by dividing the number of prevalent cases by the total number of eligible people in the study population at the study end date (December 31, 2018) . Point prevalence will be reported for the complete cohort and stratified by sex and age (categorised). 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y   18 We anticipate some attrition of recording of AA in the historic records. This is particularly likely to be the case in records preceding the computerisation of primary care which occurred in the 1990s. If we observe evidence of this being a major source of error in our point calculations (as evidenced by a falling point incidence in the older adult population despite there being a substantial number of incident diagnoses in this age group) then we will consider using the actuarial life table method to estimate lifetime AA risk (67) .Service utilisation and management patterns: Service utilisation will be evaluated by calculation of the annual rates of primary care visits for people diagnosed with AA in the year following diagnosis. Primary care visits will be identified from the patient's electronic health record.Management patterns will be evaluated by calculation of annual proportion of people referred for dermatology review in people diagnosed with AA in the year following diagnosis. Secondary care dermatology reviews will be identified from Read codes.In addition, management patterns will also comprise of the percentage of people diagnosed with AA and prescribed AA medication, in primary care, grouped by medication class during the year following diagnosis. Prescription information will be identified using Read and EMIS codes.Geographical distribution of AA: The geographic distribution of people with AA will be calculated from the disease incidence. The adjusted incident rate ratios will be reported. Models will be adjusted for age category, sex, ethnicity, IMD and geographic area classification derived using patient postcode at the point of data extraction.

Inclusion Criteria

The cohorts for studies 1, 2 and 3 (cases and controls) will consist of patients contributing to RCGP RCS database during the study period (between January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2018 inclusive). The cohorts for study 4 (cases and controls) will consist of patients contributing to RCGP RCS database between January 1, 2004 and December 31, 2018 inclusive.The AA prevalence population consists of patients actively registered and alive at the end date of the study period (December 31, 2018).The AA incidence population consists of patients registered at any point during the study period but without a prior recorded AA diagnosis. The follow-up period for incident cases will begin on the latest of the date of diagnosis indicated by the first diagnostic AA Read code. Follow-up will end at the earliest of the study end-date (December 31, 2018), the date of patient transfer from an included practice or date of death.Studies 1 and 4 will include both children and adults. Studies 2 and 3 will include only people aged ≥18 (as at date of AA diagnosis for cases or start of follow-up for controls). Only people aged ≥ 18 and ≤ 65 will be included in the unemployment and sick day analysis (Study 2).The cohorts for studies 1, 2 and 3 (cases and controls) will consist of patients contributing to RCGP RCS database during the study period (between January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2018 inclusive). The cohorts for study 4 (cases and controls) will consist of patients contributing to RCGP RCS database between January 1, 2004 and December 31, 2018 inclusive.The AA prevalence population consists of patients actively registered and alive at the end date of the study period (December 31, 2018).The AA incidence population consists of patients registered at any point during the study period but without a prior recorded AA diagnosis. The follow-up period for incident cases will begin on the latest of the date of diagnosis indicated by the first diagnostic AA Read code. Follow-up will end at the earliest of the study end-date (December 31, 2018), the date of patient transfer from an included practice or date of death.Studies 1 and 4 will include both children and adults. Studies 2 and 3 will include only people aged ≥18 (as at date of AA diagnosis for cases or start of follow-up for controls). Only people aged ≥ 18 and ≤ 65 will be included in the unemployment and sick day analysis (Study 2).

Exclusion Criteria

The following exclusion criteria will be applied:• People with the alternative non-AA diagnoses (section 3.4.1) (AA incidence cohort).• People with AA diagnosis within 6 months of registration (AA incidence cohort).• People with less than 1 year of follow up within the dataset (unless under 1 year old) (AA incidence and AA prevalence cohorts). The following exclusion criteria will be applied:• People with the alternative non-AA diagnoses (section 3.4.1) (AA incidence cohort).• People with AA diagnosis within 6 months of registration (AA incidence cohort).• People with less than 1 year of follow up within the dataset (unless under 1 year old) (AA incidence and AA prevalence cohorts). 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 

Matching process

The control cohorts will be defined by matching cases with people who have never been diagnosed with AA either prior to or during the study period, by age, sex, and time since practice registration, at GP practice level. After matching an assessment of sociodemographic differences using IMD quintiles will be performed. If there are substantial differences in socioeconomic status between cases and controls, re-matching with IMD as an additional matching criterion will be considered Controls will require at least one year of follow-up when matched to minimize the risk of a non-recorded existing diagnosis of AA. The follow-up period for each matched control will begin at the start of follow-up of their matched case and have the same follow-up time criteria applied (where applicable).Each case is matched with four controls using a nearest neighbour matching algorithm (66) to create a baseline matched dataset.Study 1 will include all matched patients to compare rates of primary care visits. Study 2 (incidence of mental health after AA diagnosis) and study 3 (incidence of atopic and autoimmune conditions) will both use a subset of the baseline matched dataset; cases will be people diagnosed with AA without the relevant condition at their start of follow up, controls will be people not diagnosed with AA and without the relevant condition at their start of follow up.The matching for the incidence of common infections (study 4) will use a different approach to studies 2 and 3: cases will be people diagnosed with AA on or before 1 st January 2014 (exact date will be dependent on data availability) without the relevant infection, controls will be people not diagnosed with AA prior to this date and without the relevant infection. People who develop AA during the follow up will be excluded from the pool of available cohorts prior to matching. This approach will mitigate systematic recording bias that is likely due to an increased propensity of people with incident AA to consult within the months following diagnosis.The case-control design studies (prevalence of mental health at AA diagnosis (study 2), and prevalence of atopic and autoimmune conditions at AA diagnosis (study 3)) will both define cases as people newly diagnosed with AA over the study period. For each case, the prevalence of the conditions of interest as at the date of AA diagnosis will be retrospectively established. Controls will be people not diagnosed with AA. For each control, the date of AA diagnosis of their matched case counterpart will then be used as the baseline date and the prevalence of the conditions of interest on that date will be retrospectively established.In Study 2 and Study 3, the same baseline cases and control cohorts will be used for both the case-control and matched-cohort analyses.The control cohorts will be defined by matching cases with people who have never been diagnosed with AA either prior to or during the study period, by age, sex, and time since practice registration, at GP practice level. After matching an assessment of sociodemographic differences using IMD quintiles will be performed. If there are substantial differences in socioeconomic status between cases and controls, re-matching with IMD as an additional matching criterion will be considered Controls will require at least one year of follow-up when matched to minimize the risk of a non-recorded existing diagnosis of AA. The follow-up period for each matched control will begin at the start of follow-up of their matched case and have the same follow-up time criteria applied (where applicable).Each case is matched with four controls using a nearest neighbour matching algorithm (66) to create a baseline matched dataset.Study 1 will include all matched patients to compare rates of primary care visits. Study 2 (incidence of mental health after AA diagnosis) and study 3 (incidence of atopic and autoimmune conditions) will both use a subset of the baseline matched dataset; cases will be people diagnosed with AA without the relevant condition at their start of follow up, controls will be people not diagnosed with AA and without the relevant condition at their start of follow up.The matching for the incidence of common infections (study 4) will use a different approach to studies 2 and 3: cases will be people diagnosed with AA on or before 1 st January 2014 (exact date will be dependent on data availability) without the relevant infection, controls will be people not diagnosed with AA prior to this date and without the relevant infection. People who develop AA during the follow up will be excluded from the pool of available cohorts prior to matching. This approach will mitigate systematic recording bias that is likely due to an increased propensity of people with incident AA to consult within the months following diagnosis.The case-control design studies (prevalence of mental health at AA diagnosis (study 2), and prevalence of atopic and autoimmune conditions at AA diagnosis (study 3)) will both define cases as people newly diagnosed with AA over the study period. For each case, the prevalence of the conditions of interest as at the date of AA diagnosis will be retrospectively established. Controls will be people not diagnosed with AA. For each control, the date of AA diagnosis of their matched case counterpart will then be used as the baseline date and the prevalence of the conditions of interest on that date will be retrospectively established.In Study 2 and Study 3, the same baseline cases and control cohorts will be used for both the case-control and matched-cohort analyses.

AA definition exploratory analyses

To check the validity of our AA definition (section 3.4.1), annual incident trends of specified alopecia (AA), (Supplementary Table S1 .1, Additional file 2), non-specific alopecia (Supplementary Table S1 .1, Additional file 2) and other specified alopecia (Supplementary  Table S1 .1, Additional file 2) will be analysed for the purpose of identifying changes in coding practice. The AA case definition may be amended based on the results of this analysis if considered appropriate and necessary. Any changes required will be reported in full in a final study publication. The mean, standard deviation (sd) and any other statistical measures, will be reported to one decimal place. Continuous data will be summarised in the form of means, sd, median, interquartile range (IQR) and range as appropriate. Categorical data will be summarised using frequencies and proportions. Chi-squared and t-tests will be performed to compare the frequency of dichotomous variables and the values of continuous variables where relevant. 95% CIs will be reported for main effect sizes. Statistical significance will be assessed using p<0.05. Actual p-values will be reported except for p-values less than 3 decimal places which will be reported as "<0.001". P-values >0.1 will be reported to one decimal place, p-values between 0.01 and 0.1 will be reported to 2 decimal places, and pvalues between 0.001 and 0.01 will be reported to three decimal places.The assessment of any associations with baseline characteristics and the outcomes of interest (mental health conditions (study 2), autoimmune and atopic conditions (study 3) and common infections (study 4)) will be assessed using logistic regression, Cox proportional hazards models, Poisson regression or zero-inflated Poisson regression as appropriate depending on the characteristics of the outcome variable. A standard set of features will be used in all multivariable models: age, sex, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, BMI, smoking status, alcohol status, and historical propensity to consult (defined as the number of primary care visits an individual has in the year prior to their study start date). Specific co-morbidity adjustment will be specific to each analysis.Assumptions of statistical approaches will be assessed, and transformations used if necessary (although it is not anticipated that the data will violate model assumptions).To check the validity of our AA definition (section 3.4.1), annual incident trends of specified alopecia (AA), (Supplementary Table S1 .1, Additional file 2), non-specific alopecia (Supplementary Table S1 .1, Additional file 2) and other specified alopecia (Supplementary  Table S1 .1, Additional file 2) will be analysed for the purpose of identifying changes in coding practice. The AA case definition may be amended based on the results of this analysis if considered appropriate and necessary. Any changes required will be reported in full in a final study publication. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 The mean, standard deviation (sd) and any other statistical measures, will be reported to one decimal place. Continuous data will be summarised in the form of means, sd, median, interquartile range (IQR) and range as appropriate. Categorical data will be summarised using frequencies and proportions. Chi-squared and t-tests will be performed to compare the frequency of dichotomous variables and the values of continuous variables where relevant. 95% CIs will be reported for main effect sizes. Statistical significance will be assessed using p<0.05. Actual p-values will be reported except for p-values less than 3 decimal places which will be reported as "<0.001". P-values >0.1 will be reported to one decimal place, p-values between 0.01 and 0.1 will be reported to 2 decimal places, and pvalues between 0.001 and 0.01 will be reported to three decimal places.The assessment of any associations with baseline characteristics and the outcomes of interest (mental health conditions (study 2), autoimmune and atopic conditions (study 3) and common infections (study 4)) will be assessed using logistic regression, Cox proportional hazards models, Poisson regression or zero-inflated Poisson regression as appropriate depending on the characteristics of the outcome variable. A standard set of features will be used in all multivariable models: age, sex, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, BMI, smoking status, alcohol status, and historical propensity to consult (defined as the number of primary care visits an individual has in the year prior to their study start date). Specific co-morbidity adjustment will be specific to each analysis.Assumptions of statistical approaches will be assessed, and transformations used if necessary (although it is not anticipated that the data will violate model assumptions).

Sensitiv ity analysis

Study 2: Sensitivity analyses will be performed to compare the baseline prevalence and incidence over two years post alopecia diagnosis of the three primary mental health conditions (depressive episodes, recurrent depressive disorder and anxiety disorder) in people with non-specific alopecia codes only (i.e. no prior or subsequent codes specifying alopecia type) using the same matching process used for the primary analyses.Study 3: We will replicate this sensitivity analysis to compare the baseline prevalence and incidence of atopic and autoimmune conditions in people with non-specific alopecia codes only.Study 4: In the common infections theme, we will use a survival model to investigate time to first infection. We will also compare the results of the study outcomes when 1) we increase the number of cases to include people who develop AA during the follow up and 2) use a similar matching approach to the other studies: perform matching using the time of AA diagnosis and follow for up to five years after diagnosis (or matched date for controls). Both of these approaches will be used to investigate the effect of bias.Study 2: Sensitivity analyses will be performed to compare the baseline prevalence and incidence over two years post alopecia diagnosis of the three primary mental health conditions (depressive episodes, recurrent depressive disorder and anxiety disorder) in people with non-specific alopecia codes only (i.e. no prior or subsequent codes specifying alopecia type) using the same matching process used for the primary analyses.Study 3: We will replicate this sensitivity analysis to compare the baseline prevalence and incidence of atopic and autoimmune conditions in people with non-specific alopecia codes only.Study 4: In the common infections theme, we will use a survival model to investigate time to first infection. We will also compare the results of the study outcomes when 1) we increase the number of cases to include people who develop AA during the follow up and 2) use a similar matching approach to the other studies: perform matching using the time of AA diagnosis and follow for up to five years after diagnosis (or matched date for controls). Both of these approaches will be used to investigate the effect of bias.

Missing data

These studies will use the missing indicator variable method as missing data are considered likely not to be missing at random, meaning multiple imputation approaches will lack validity.Patient will need to be excluded from analyses based on a matched design if they have incomplete data in the fields (age, sex) required to run the matching process. In similar studies, the exclusion rate due to incomplete data has been low (68, 69) . These studies will use the missing indicator variable method as missing data are considered likely not to be missing at random, meaning multiple imputation approaches will lack validity.Patient will need to be excluded from analyses based on a matched design if they have incomplete data in the fields (age, sex) required to run the matching process. In similar studies, the exclusion rate due to incomplete data has been low (68, 69) . 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 

Study Limitations

These are discussed in the associated protocol manuscript.These are discussed in the associated protocol manuscript.

Statistical softw are

All statistical analyses will be performed using R software.All statistical analyses will be performed using R software.

Ethics

Study approval will be requested from the Research Committee of the RCGP RSC. These studies do not meet the requirements for formal ethics board review in their current form as defined using the NHS Health Research Authority research decision tool (http://www.hra-decisiontools.org.uk/research/).The study will be conducted in accordance with legal and regulatory requirements, as well as with scientific purpose, value, and rigor and follow generally accepted research practices described in Guidelines for Good Pharmacoepidemiology Practices (GPP) issued by the International Society for Pharmacoepidemiology (ISPE), and Good Epidemiological Practice (GEP) guidelines issued by the International Epidemiological Association (IEA). Study reporting will be conducted in accordance with the relevant EQUATOR (Enhancing the QUAlity and Transparency Of health Research) guidelines. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y   9 Supplementary table S1.4. Medications which may be issued in primary care for the treatment of alopecia areata.Study approval will be requested from the Research Committee of the RCGP RSC. These studies do not meet the requirements for formal ethics board review in their current form as defined using the NHS Health Research Authority research decision tool (http://www.hra-decisiontools.org.uk/research/).The study will be conducted in accordance with legal and regulatory requirements, as well as with scientific purpose, value, and rigor and follow generally accepted research practices described in Guidelines for Good Pharmacoepidemiology Practices (GPP) issued by the International Society for Pharmacoepidemiology (ISPE), and Good Epidemiological Practice (GEP) guidelines issued by the International Epidemiological Association (IEA). Study reporting will be conducted in accordance with the relevant EQUATOR (Enhancing the QUAlity and Transparency Of health Research) guidelines.

Acknow ledgements

* topical steroids will be grouped by potency; mild, moderate, potent, and very potent. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y 10Medical writing support was provided by Louise Jordan at Momentum Data and was funded by Pfizer. Editorial support was provided by Anita Lynam, Andrew McGovern, and John Dennis at Momentum Data and was funded by Pfizer. The authors would like to acknowledge project management support from Filipa Ferreira of the University of Oxford and University of Surrey. Matthew Harries was supported by the NIHR Manchester. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 

Codes used to identify mental health conditions and treatments

Supplementary 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 All Gouging own body parts Xa2nzAll Gouging own flesh Xa2o0All Gouging own eyes Xa2o1All Gouging own rectum Xa30DAll Gouging own vagina E2731 All Head-banging Xa2o2All Banging own head against object Xa2o3All Banging own head against own body parts Xa2pIAll Hitting self Xa2pJAll Punching self Xa2pKAll Slapping self X766S All Head-hitting Xa2p3All Inserting foreign bodies into own orifices Ua14QAll Self-electrocution Xa2pQAll Nipping self Xa2pMAll Picking own skin Xa2pRAll Pinching self Xa2pNAll Rubbing own skin X766T All Scratches self Xa303All Self-scalding Ua14NAll Self-incineration X766L All Self-mutilation X766MAll Self-mutilation of hands Xa2nlAll Self-mutilation of genitalia X766NAll Self-mutilation of penis X766OAll Self-mutilation of eyes Xa2nmAll Enucleation of own eyes X766PAll Self-mutilation of ears Xa2noAll Self-inducing a prolapse Xa2nqAll Breaking own bones Xa2nrAll Pulling own teeth out Xa2ntAll Eating own flesh Xa2nvAll All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping from residential premisesSupplementary 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 All Adjustment reaction with anxious mood E292yAll Adjustment reaction with mixed disturbance of emotion E292zAll Adjustment reaction with disturbance of other emotion NOS E293.All Adjustment reaction with predominant disturbance of conduct E2930All Adjustment reaction with aggression E2931All Adjustment reaction with antisocial behaviour E2932 All Adjustment reaction with destructiveness E293zAll Adjustment reaction with predominant disturbance of conduct NOS

TK71. All

Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping from other manmade structure TK72.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping from natural sites TK72.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping from natural sites TK7z.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping from high place NOS TKx.. All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by other meansSuicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping from other man-made structure TK72.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping from natural sites TK72.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping from natural sites TK7z.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping from high place NOS X71B6All Suicide or self injury by jumping from high man-made structure X71B7All Suicide or self injury by jumping from high building X71B8 All Suicide or self injury by jumping from bridge X71B9 All Suicide or self injury by jumping from high natural feature X71BAAll Suicide or self injury by jumping off cliff Xa3jHAll Attempted suicide -jumping from a high place Xa3jQAll Suicide -jumping from a high place TKx.. All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by other meansSuicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping from other manmade structure TK72.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping from natural sites TK72.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping from natural sites TK7z.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping from high place NOS TKx.. All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by other meansSuicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping from other man-made structure TK72.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping from natural sites TK72.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping from natural sites TK7z.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping from high place NOS X71B6All Suicide or self injury by jumping from high man-made structure X71B7All Suicide or self injury by jumping from high building X71B8 All Suicide or self injury by jumping from bridge X71B9 All Suicide or self injury by jumping from high natural feature X71BAAll Suicide or self injury by jumping off cliff Xa3jHAll Attempted suicide -jumping from a high place Xa3jQAll Suicide -jumping from a high place TKx.. All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by other means

TKx0. All

Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping or lying before moving object TKx01All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by lying before moving object TKx0z All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping or lying before moving object NOS TKx1.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by burns or fire TKx2.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by scald TKx3.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by extremes of cold TKx4.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by electrocution TKx5.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by crashing of motor vehicle TKx6.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by crashing of aircraft All Suicide or selfinflicted injury by handgun TK51.All Suicide or selfinflicted injury by shotgun TK52.All Suicide or selfinflicted injury by hunting rifle TK53.All Suicide or selfinflicted injury by military firearm TK54.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by other firearm TK55.All Suicide or selfinflicted injury by explosives TK5z.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by firearms and explosives NOS Xa3jFAll Attempted suicide -firearms Xa3jOAll Suicide -firearms TK6.. All Suicide or selfinflicted injury by cutting and stabbing TK60.All Suicide or selfinflicted injury by cutting TK61.All Suicide or selfinflicted injury by stabbingSuicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping or lying before moving object TKx00All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping before moving object TKx01All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by lying before moving object TKx0z All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping or lying before moving object NOS TKxy.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by other specified means TKxz.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by other means NOS TKx1.All Suicide or self injury by burning or fire TKx2.All Suicide or self injury by scalding X71BFAll Suicide or self injury by igniting petrol soaked clothing All Attempted suicide NOS Xa3jRAll Suicide NOS X71B3 All Self poisoning by gas TK1.. All Suicide and selfinflicted poisoning by gases in domestic use TK21.All Suicide and selfinflicted poisoning by other carbon monoxide TK2y.All Suicide and selfinflicted poisoning by other gases and vapours TK2z.All Suicide and selfinflicted poisoning by gases and vapours NOS X71B4All Self poisoning by carbon monoxide TK20.All Self poisoning by motor vehicle exhaust gas X71B5 All Self poisoning by coal gas X71BBAll Suicide or self injury associated with moving vehicles TKx5.All Suicide or selfinflicted injury by crashing motor vehicle TKx6.All Suicide or selfinflicted injury by crashing of aircraft X71BCAll Suicide or self injury by placing self in path of moving vehicle X71BDAll Suicide or self injury by placing self in path of moving motor vehicle X71BE All Suicide or self injury by placing self in path of moving railway vehicle XE22JAll Suicide or attempted suicide by drowning Xa3jEAll Attempted suicide -drowning Xa3jNAll Suicide -drowning XM1FsAll Self hanging, strangulation or suffocation TK3.. All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by hanging, strangulation and suffocation TK30.All Suicide or attempted suicide by hanging Xa3jLAll Suicide -hangingSuicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping or lying before moving object TKx01All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by lying before moving object TKx0z All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping or lying before moving object NOS TKx1.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by burns or fire TKx2.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by scald TKx3.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by extremes of cold TKx4.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by electrocution TKx5.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by crashing of motor vehicle TKx6.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by crashing of aircraft All Suicide or selfinflicted injury by handgun TK51.All Suicide or selfinflicted injury by shotgun TK52.All Suicide or selfinflicted injury by hunting rifle TK53.All Suicide or selfinflicted injury by military firearm TK54.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by other firearm TK55.All Suicide or selfinflicted injury by explosives TK5z.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by firearms and explosives NOS Xa3jFAll Attempted suicide -firearms Xa3jOAll Suicide -firearms TK6.. All Suicide or selfinflicted injury by cutting and stabbing TK60.All Suicide or selfinflicted injury by cutting TK61.All Suicide or selfinflicted injury by stabbingSuicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping or lying before moving object TKx00All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping before moving object TKx01All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by lying before moving object TKx0z All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping or lying before moving object NOS TKxy.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by other specified means TKxz.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by other means NOS TKx1.All Suicide or self injury by burning or fire TKx2.All Suicide or self injury by scalding X71BFAll Suicide or self injury by igniting petrol soaked clothing All Attempted suicide NOS Xa3jRAll Suicide NOS X71B3 All Self poisoning by gas TK1.. All Suicide and selfinflicted poisoning by gases in domestic use TK21.All Suicide and selfinflicted poisoning by other carbon monoxide TK2y.All Suicide and selfinflicted poisoning by other gases and vapours TK2z.All Suicide and selfinflicted poisoning by gases and vapours NOS X71B4All Self poisoning by carbon monoxide TK20.All Self poisoning by motor vehicle exhaust gas X71B5 All Self poisoning by coal gas X71BBAll Suicide or self injury associated with moving vehicles TKx5.All Suicide or selfinflicted injury by crashing motor vehicle TKx6.All Suicide or selfinflicted injury by crashing of aircraft X71BCAll Suicide or self injury by placing self in path of moving vehicle X71BDAll Suicide or self injury by placing self in path of moving motor vehicle X71BE All Suicide or self injury by placing self in path of moving railway vehicle XE22JAll Suicide or attempted suicide by drowning Xa3jEAll Attempted suicide -drowning Xa3jNAll Suicide -drowning XM1FsAll Self hanging, strangulation or suffocation TK3.. All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by hanging, strangulation and suffocation TK30.All Suicide or attempted suicide by hanging Xa3jLAll Suicide -hanging

TK6z. All

Suicide and selfinflicted injury by cutting and stabbing instruments NOS Xa3jGAll Attempted suicide -cut/stab Xa3jP All Suicide -cut/stab TK7.. All Suicide or self injury by jumping from a height TK70.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping from residential premisesSuicide and selfinflicted injury by cutting and stabbing instruments NOS Xa3jGAll Attempted suicide -cut/stab Xa3jP All Suicide -cut/stab TK7.. All Suicide or self injury by jumping from a height TK70.All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping from residential premises

TK3y. All

Suicide and selfinflicted injury by other means of hanging, strangulation and suffocationSuicide and selfinflicted injury by other means of hanging, strangulation and suffocation

TK3z. All

Suicide and selfinflicted injury by hanging, strangulation and suffocation NOS XE22IAll Suicide and selfinflicted injury by suffocation by plastic bag Xa3jDAll Attempted suicide -suffocation Xa3jMAll Suicide -suffocation TK50.All Suicide or selfinflicted injury by handgun Ua1AAAll Hanging self Ua1ABAll Drowning self Ua1A9All Jumping from height Ua1A8All Jumping from building Ua1A7All Jumping from bridge Ua14UAll Jumping from cliff Ua1AEAll Self-asphyxiation All Self-strangulation Ua1ACAll Self-suffocation Ua14SAll Throwing self in front of vehicle Ua14TAll Throwing self in front of train X71B0 All Self poisoning by non-drug solid or liquid agents TK07.All Self poisoning by corrosive or caustic substance TK08.All Self poisoning by arsenic or its compounds X71B2 All Self poisoning by plants or parts of plants XM1FXAll Self poisoning by agricultural chemicalSuicide and selfinflicted injury by hanging, strangulation and suffocation NOS XE22IAll Suicide and selfinflicted injury by suffocation by plastic bag Xa3jDAll Attempted suicide -suffocation Xa3jMAll Suicide -suffocation TK50.All Suicide or selfinflicted injury by handgun Ua1AAAll Hanging self Ua1ABAll Drowning self Ua1A9All Jumping from height Ua1A8All Jumping from building Ua1A7All Jumping from bridge Ua14UAll Jumping from cliff Ua1AEAll Self-asphyxiation All Self-strangulation Ua1ACAll Self-suffocation Ua14SAll Throwing self in front of vehicle Ua14TAll Throwing self in front of train X71B0 All Self poisoning by non-drug solid or liquid agents TK07.All Self poisoning by corrosive or caustic substance TK08.All Self poisoning by arsenic or its compounds X71B2 All Self poisoning by plants or parts of plants XM1FXAll Self poisoning by agricultural chemical

TK06. All

Suicide and selfinflicted poisoning by agricultural and horticultural chemical and pharmaceutical preparations other than plant foods and fertilizers X71B1 All Self poisoning by paraquat Ua14RAll All Deliberate self poisoning TK0.. All Suicide and selfinflicted poisoning by solid and liquid substances X71AmAll Deliberate overdose of drug or pharmaceutical preparation TK00. All Suicide and selfinflicted poisoning by analgesics, antipyretics and anti-rheumatics TK01.All Suicide and selfinflicted poisoning by barbiturates TK010All Suicide and self inflicted injury by amobarbital TK011All Suicide and self inflicted injury by Barbitone TK012All Suicide and self inflicted injury by Butabarbitone TK013All Suicide and self inflicted injury by Pentabarbitone TK014All Suicide and self inflicted injury by phenobarbital TK015All Suicide and self inflicted injury by secobarbital TK01zAll Suicide and self inflicted injury by barbiturates TK02.All Suicide and selfinflicted poisoning by other sedatives and hypnoticsSuicide and selfinflicted poisoning by agricultural and horticultural chemical and pharmaceutical preparations other than plant foods and fertilizers X71B1 All Self poisoning by paraquat Ua14RAll All Deliberate overdose of drug or pharmaceutical preparation TK00. All Suicide and selfinflicted poisoning by analgesics, antipyretics and anti-rheumatics TK01.All Suicide and selfinflicted poisoning by barbiturates TK010All Suicide and self inflicted injury by amobarbital TK011All Suicide and self inflicted injury by Barbitone TK012All Suicide and self inflicted injury by Butabarbitone TK013All Suicide and self inflicted injury by Pentabarbitone TK014All Suicide and self inflicted injury by phenobarbital TK015All Suicide and self inflicted injury by secobarbital TK01zAll Suicide and self inflicted injury by barbiturates TK02.All Suicide and selfinflicted poisoning by other sedatives and hypnotics

TK03. All

Suicide and selfinflicted poisoning by tranquillisers and other psychotropic agents TK04.All Suicide and selfinflicted poisoning by other drugs and medicines TK05.All Suicide and selfinflicted poisoning by drug or medicine NOS X71ApAll Deliberate overdose of aspirin X71AxAll Deliberate overdose of diazepam X71AvAll Deliberate overdose of methadone X71AzAll Deliberate overdose of temazepam X71ArAll Deliberate overdose of co-proxamol X71AtAll Deliberate overdose of diamorphine X71AwAll Deliberate overdose of benzodiazepine X71AuAll Deliberate overdose of dihydrocodeine X71AsAll Deliberate overdose of opiate analgesic X71AyAll Deliberate overdose of chlordiazepoxide X71AqAll Deliberate overdose of combined analgesic X71AnAll Deliberate overdose of non-opiate analgesics Xa0JlAll Deliberate overdose of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent XaR4SAll Intentional overdose of prescription only medication Xa62FAll Intentional over-the-counter product overdose Xa65iAll Intentional bismuth compound overdose Xa65mAll Intentional sucralfate overdose Xa65qAll Intentional liquorice overdose Xa65uAll Intentional misoprostol overdose Xa65zAll Intentional cimetidine overdose Xa663All Intentional famotidine overdose Xa667All Intentional nizatidine overdose All Intentional imipramine overdose Xa6E9All Intentional iprindole overdose Xa6EDAll Intentional lofepramine overdose Xa6EHAll Intentional nortriptyline overdose Xa6ELAll Intentional protriptyline overdose Xa6EPAll Intentional trimipramine overdose Xa6ZpAll Intentional overdose of tricyclic antidepressant Xa6EUAll Intentional phenelzine overdose Xa6EYAll Intentional iproniazid overdose Xa6EcAll Intentional isocarboxazid overdose Xa6EgAll Intentional tranylcypromine overdose Xa6EkAll Intentional moclobemide overdose Xa6EoAll Intentional tryptophan overdose Xa6EsAll Intentional venlafaxine overdose Xa6ExAll Intentional sertraline overdose Xa6F1All Intentional paroxetine overdose Xa6F5All Intentional nefazodone overdose Xa6F9All Intentional citalopram overdose Xa6FDAll Intentional fluoxetine overdose Xa6FHAll Intentional fluvoxamine overdose Xa6FMAll Intentional maprotiline overdose Xa6FQAll Intentional mianserin overdose Xa6FUAll Intentional trazodone overdose Xa6FYAll Intentional viloxazine overdose Xa6FdAll Intentional beclamide overdose Xa6FhAll Intentional lamotrigine overdose Xa6FlAll Intentional piracetam overdose Xa6FpAll Intentional gabapentin overdose Xa6FtAll Intentional overdose by sodium valproate Xa6FyAll Intentional methylphenobarbital overdose Xa6G2All Intentional phenobarbital overdose Xa6G6All Intentional primidone overdose Xa6GAAll Intentional overdose by carbamazepine Xa6GEAll Intentional vigabatrin overdose X711gAll Accidental overdose of phenytoin Xa6GLAll Intentional ethosuximide overdose Xa6GPAll Intentional clonazepam overdose Xa6GVAll Intentional zopiclone overdose Xa6GZAll Intentional zolpidem overdose Xa6GdAll Intentional chlormezanone overdose Xa6GhAll Intentional methyprylone overdose All Intentional thiethylperazine overdose Xa6JqAll Intentional chlorpromazine overdose Xa6JuAll Intentional pipotiazine overdose Xa6JyAll Intentional promazine overdose Xa6K2All Intentional thioridazine overdose Xa6K6All Intentional perphenazine overdose Xa6KAAll Intentional prochlorperazine overdose Xa6KEAll Intentional trifluoperazine overdose Xa6KJAll Intentional chlorprothixene overdose Xa6KNAll Intentional flupentixol decanoate overdose Xa6KRAll Intentional zuclopenthixol decanoate overdose Xa6KVAll Intentional zuclopenthixol overdose Xa6KZAll Intentional flupentixol overdose Xa6KdAll Intentional oxypertine overdose Xa6KhAll Intentional remoxipride overdose Xa6KjAll Intentional overdose of non-barbiturate hypnotic Xa6KoAll Intentional selegiline overdose Xa6KtAll Intentional amfetamine overdose Xa6KyAll Intentional antabuse overdose Xa6L3All Intentional cannabis overdose Xa6L7All Intentional overdose by lysergic acid Xa6LBAll Intentional psilocybin overdose Xa6LFAll Intentional mescaline overdose Xa6LJAll Intentional overdose of ecstasy Xa6LNAll Intentional overdose by cocaine Xa6LRAll Intentional overdose by crack cocaine Xa6LVAll Intentional caffeine overdose Xa6LbAll Intentional atenolol overdose Xa6LfAll Intentional propranolol overdose Xa6LhAll Intentional overdose of beta-adrenergic blocking drug Xa6LmAll Intentional phenoxybenzamine overdose Xa6LqAll Intentional nicotine overdose Xa6LuAll Intentional overdose by calcium-channel blockers Xa6LzAll Intentional pilocarpine overdose Xa6M3All Intentional acetylcholine overdose Xa6M7All Intentional anticholinesterase overdose Xa6MDAll Intentional metaraminol overdose Xa6MIAll Intentional salbutamol overdose Xa6MLAll Intentional overdose of isoprenaline Xa6MQAll Intentional clonidine overdose Xa6MVAll Intentional hyoscine overdose Xa6MZAll Intentional atropine overdose Xa6MeAll Intentional acetylcysteine overdose Xa6MjAll Intentional nikethamide overdose All Intentional diphenhydramine overdose Xa6N0All Intentional thonzylamine overdose Xa6N4All Intentional tripelennamine overdose Xa6N8All Intentional hydroxyzine overdose Xa6NDAll Intentional aminophylline overdose Xa6NHAll Intentional theophylline overdose Xa6NLAll Intentional bronchodilator preparations overdose Xa6NRAll Intentional dithranol overdose Xa6NWAll Intentional gamolenic acid overdose Xa6NbAll Intentional etretinate overdose Xa6NfAll Intentional acitretin overdose Xa6NjAll Intentional tretinoin overdose Xa6NnAll Intentional isotretinoin overdose Xa6NtAll Intentional allopurinol overdose Xa6NxAll Intentional colchicine overdose Xa6O3All Intentional baclofen overdose Xa6O7All Intentional methocarbamol overdose Xa6OBAll Intentional gold salt overdose Xa6OGAll Intentional papaverine overdose Xa6OLAll Intentional prostaglandin overdose Xa6OSAll Intentional naloxone overdose Xa6OWAll Intentional protamine sulphate overdose Xa6OaAll Intentional alternative medicine overdose Xa6OjAll Intentional flucytosine overdose Xa6OnAll Intentional griseofulvin overdose Xa6OrAll Intentional amphotericin B overdose Xa6OvAll Intentional nystatin overdose Xa6P0All Intentional idoxuridine overdose Xa6P5All Intentional pyrimethamine overdose Xa6P9All Intentional chloroquine overdose Xa6PDAll Intentional primaquine overdose Xa6PHAll Intentional quinine overdose Xa6PLAll Intentional mefloquine overdose Xa6PPAll Intentional proguanil overdose Xa6PUAll Intentional piperazine overdose Xa6PYAll Intentional tiabendazole overdose Xa6PeAll Intentional kanamycin overdose Xa6PiAll Intentional streptomycin overdose Xa6PmAll Intentional gentamicin overdose Xa6PqAll Intentional tobramycin overdose Xa6PuAll Intentional netilmicin overdose Xa6PzAll Intentional erythromycin overdose Xa6Q3All Intentional azithromycin overdose Xa6Q7All Intentional clarithromycin overdose All Intentional nitrofuran derivative overdose Xa6QVAll Intentional fusidic acid overdose Xa6QZAll Intentional 4-quinolones overdose Xa6QeAll Intentional ampicillin overdose Xa6QjAll Intentional cloxacillin overdose Xa6QnAll Intentional carbenicillin overdose Xa6QrAll Intentional flucloxacillin overdose Xa6QxAll Intentional cefadroxil overdose Xa6R1All Intentional cefalexin overdose Xa6R5All Intentional cephalothin overdose Xa6R9All Intentional cefazolin overdose Xa6RDAll Intentional cefradine overdose Xa6RHAll Intentional latamoxef overdose Xa6RMAll Intentional cefaclor overdose Xa6RQAll Intentional cefuroxime overdose Xa6RUAll Intentional cephamandole overdose Xa6RZAll Intentional cefotaxime overdose Xa6RdAll Intentional ceftazidime overdose Xa6RhAll Intentional ceftizoxime overdose Xa6RlAll Intentional cefixime overdose Xa6RpAll Intentional cefodizime overdose Xa6RtAll Intentional cefpodoxime overdose Xa6RxAll Intentional ceftriaxone overdose Xa6SAAll Intentional cefpirome overdose Xa6S1All Intentional ceftibuten overdose Xa6S5All Intentional cefsulodin overdose Xa6SGAll Intentional doxycycline overdose Xa6SKAll Intentional minocycline overdose Xa6SOAll Intentional oxytetracycline overdose Xa6SSAll Intentional tetracycline overdose Xa6SWAll Intentional chloramphenicol overdose Xa6SaAll Intentional co-trimoxazole overdose Xa6SfAll Intentional antimony compound overdose Xa6SjAll Intentional hydroxyquinoline overdose Xa6SpAll Intentional rifampin overdose Xa6StAll Intentional isoniazid overdose Xa6SxAll Intentional ethambutol overdose Xa6T1All Intentional antileprotic drug overdose Xa6T5All Intentional pesticide product overdose Xa6TBAll Intentional gamma globulin overdose Xa6TFAll Intentional vaccine overdose All Intentional prednisone overdose Xa6ThAll Intentional dexamethasone overdose Xa6TlAll Intentional insulin overdose Xa6TrAll Intentional acetohexamide overdose Xa6TvAll Intentional chlorpropamide overdose Xa6TzAll Intentional overdose by glibenclamide Xa6U3All Intentional tolbutamide overdose Xa6U8All Intentional overdose by metformin Xa6UDAll Intentional progestogen overdose Xa6UIAll Intentional nandrolone overdose Xa6UMAll Intentional oxymetholone overdose Xa6UQAll Intentional methandriol overdose Xa6UUAll Intentional oral contraceptive overdose Xa6UZAll Intentional testosterone overdose Xa6UdAll Intentional oestrogen overdose Xa6UiAll Intentional liothyronine overdose Xa6XhAll Intentional streptokinase overdose Xa6XlAll Intentional urokinase overdose Xa6UmAll Intentional thyroxin overdose Xa6UzAll Intentional heparin overdose Xa6V3All Intentional coumarin overdose Xa6V7All Intentional warfarin sodium overdose Xa6VDAll Intentional ferrous sulphate overdose Xa6VIAll Intentional iodide overdose Xa6VNAll Intentional vitamin A overdose Xa6VRAll Intentional vitamin D overdose Xa6VVAll Intentional vitamin K overdose Xa6VaAll Intentional nicotinic acid derivative overdose Xa6VeAll Intentional folic acid overdose Xa6ViAll Intentional potassium overdose Xa6VoAll Intentional clofibrate overdose Xa6VuAll Intentional disopyramide overdose Xa6VyAll Intentional quinidine overdose Xa6W2All Intentional procainamide overdose Xa6W7All Intentional bretylium overdose Xa6WCAll Intentional amiodarone overdose Xa6WJAll Intentional bendroflumethiazide overdose Xa6WNAll Intentional chlorothiazide overdose Xa6WSAll Intentional furosemide overdose Xa6WWAll Intentional bumetanide overdose Xa6WaAll Intentional etacrynic acid overdose All Intentional ketoprofen poisoning Xa4mYAll Intentional ketorolac poisoning Xa4mcAll Intentional mefenamic acid poisoning Xa4mgAll Intentional nabumetone poisoning Xa4mjAll Intentional naproxen poisoning Xa4mnAll Intentional nefopam poisoning Xa4mrAll Intentional oxyphenbutazone poisoning Xa4muAll Intentional phenylbutazone poisoning Xa4myAll Intentional piroxicam poisoning Xa4n2All Intentional sulindac poisoning Xa4n6All Intentional tenoxicam poisoning Xa4nAAll Intentional tiaprofenic acid poisoning Xa4nEAll Intentional tolmetin poisoning Xa4nJAll Intentional radiopharmaceutical poisoning Xa4nRAll Intentional X-ray contrast media poisoning Xa4nVAll Intentional magnetic resonance imaging contrast media poisoning Xa4nNAll Intentional X-ray diagnostic contrast media poisoning Xa4nZAll Intentional allergen extract vaccine poisoning Xa4ndAll Intentional diagnostic dye poisoning Xa53nAll Intentional dextromethorphan poisoning Xa53qAll Intentional guaifenesin poisoning Xa53tAll Intentional terpin hydrate poisoning Xa53wAll Intentional poisoning by bronchodilator drug Xa53zAll Intentional aminophylline poisoning Xa542All Intentional theophylline poisoning Xa545All Intentional poisoning by herbal asthma mixture Xa548All Intentional anti-common cold drug poisoning Xa54BAll Intentional local antipruritic poisoning Xa54EAll Intentional local astringent and detergent poisoning Xa54HAll Intentional hair treatment poisoning Xa54LAll Intentional allopurinol poisoning Xa54OAll Intentional colchicine poisoning Xa54RAll Intentional probenecid poisoning Xa54XAll Intentional gold salt poisoning Xa54aAll Intentional antirheumatic poisoning Xa54vAll Intentional chelating agent poisoning Xa54zAll Intentional alternative medicine poisoning Xa556All Intentional flucytosine poisoning Xa559All Intentional griseofulvin poisoning Xa55CAll Intentional amphotericin B poisoning All Intentional clarithromycin poisoning Xa56QAll Intentional oleandomycin poisoning Xa56TAll Intentional spiramycin poisoning Xa56XAll Intentional sodium fusidate poisoning Xa56bAll Intentional spectinomycin poisoning Xa56fAll Intentional vancomycin poisoning Xa56jAll Intentional trimethoprim poisoning Xa56mAll Intentional nitrofuran derivative poisoning Xa56qAll Intentional fusidic acid poisoning Xa56uAll Intentional 4-quinolones poisoning Xa6QZAll Intentional 4-quinolones overdose Xa56xAll Intentional ampicillin poisoning Xa570All Intentional cloxacillin poisoning Xa573All Intentional carbenicillin poisoning Xa576All Intentional penicillin G poisoning Xa57AAll Intentional flucloxacillin poisoning Xa57EAll Intentional piperacillin poisoning Xa57JAll Intentional cefadroxil poisoning Xa57MAll Intentional cefalexin poisoning Xa57PAll Intentional cephalothin poisoning Xa57TAll Intentional cefazolin poisoning Xa57XAll Intentional cefradine poisoning Xa57bAll Intentional latamoxef poisoning Xa57kAll Intentional cefuroxime poisoning Xa57gAll Intentional cefaclor poisoning Xa57oAll Intentional cephamandole poisoning Xa57tAll Intentional cefotaxime poisoning Xa57xAll Intentional ceftazidime poisoning Xa581All Intentional ceftizoxime poisoning Xa585All Intentional cefixime poisoning Xa589All Intentional cefodizime poisoning Xa58DAll Intentional cefpodoxime poisoning Xa58HAll Intentional ceftriaxone poisoning Xa58LAll Intentional ceftibuten poisoning Xa58PAll Intentional cefsulodin poisoning All Intentional minocycline poisoning Xa58pAll Intentional oxytetracycline poisoning Xa58sAll Intentional tetracycline poisoning Xa58vAll Intentional chloramphenicol poisoning Xa58zAll Intentional co-trimoxazole poisoning Xa59FAll Intentional hydroxyquinoline poisoning Xa59IAll Intentional diiodohydroxyquinoline poisoning Xa59LAll Intentional rifampin poisoning Xa59OAll Intentional isoniazid poisoning Xa59RAll Intentional ethambutol poisoning Xa59UAll Intentional cycloserine poisoning Xa59YAll Intentional antileprotic drug poisoning Xa59bAll Intentional ethionamide poisoning Xa59eAll Intentional para-aminosalicylic acid poisoning Xa59hAll Intentional sulphone poisoning Xa59lAll Intentional pesticide product poisoning All Psychoanalytic and psychodynamic therapy Xa8IJAll Long-term exploratory psychotherapy 3841.All Psychoanalysis XaA8VAll Generic psychoanalysis XaA8WAll Independent psychoanalysis XaA8TAll Kleinian psychoanalysis XaA8UAll Bion-based group psychoanalysis XaA8XAll Classical psychoanalysis All Bion-based group psychoanalysis 384Z.All Psychological analysis NOS Xa8IMAll Jungian-based therapy Xa8INAll Generic Jungian-based therapy Xa8IPAll Analytical psychology Xa8IRAll Long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy XaA8ZAll Developmental psychodynamic psychotherapy XaA8cAll Supportive expressive psychodynamic psychotherapy XaA8dAll Psychodynamic-interpersonal psychotherapy XaEVq All Psychodynamic psychotherapy Xad7CAll Focal psychodynamic therapy Xa8IRAll Long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy XaA8ZAll Developmental psychodynamic psychotherapy XaA8cAll Supportive expressive psychodynamic psychotherapy XaA8dAll Psychodynamic-interpersonal psychotherapy Xa8IIAll Short-term psychodynamic therapy XaXuc All Dynamic interpersonal therapy XaA9gAll Specific task orientated psychotherapy XE0iLAll Psychotherapy/sociotherapy 8G9Z.All Other psychotherapy NOS 8G9.. All Other psychotherapy Suicide and selfinflicted poisoning by tranquillisers and other psychotropic agents TK04.All Suicide and selfinflicted poisoning by other drugs and medicines TK05.All Suicide and selfinflicted poisoning by drug or medicine NOS X71ApAll Deliberate overdose of aspirin X71AxAll Deliberate overdose of diazepam X71AvAll Deliberate overdose of methadone X71AzAll Deliberate overdose of temazepam X71ArAll Deliberate overdose of co-proxamol X71AtAll Deliberate overdose of diamorphine X71AwAll Deliberate overdose of benzodiazepine X71AuAll Deliberate overdose of dihydrocodeine X71AsAll Deliberate overdose of opiate analgesic X71AyAll Deliberate overdose of chlordiazepoxide X71AqAll Deliberate overdose of combined analgesic X71AnAll Deliberate overdose of non-opiate analgesics Xa0JlAll Deliberate overdose of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent XaR4SAll Intentional overdose of prescription only medication Xa62FAll Intentional over-the-counter product overdose Xa65iAll Intentional bismuth compound overdose Xa65mAll Intentional sucralfate overdose Xa65qAll Intentional liquorice overdose Xa65uAll Intentional misoprostol overdose Xa65zAll Intentional cimetidine overdose Xa663All Intentional famotidine overdose Xa667All Intentional nizatidine overdose 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y   48   Xa6Ji  All  Intentional fluphenazine enanthate overdose  Xa6Jm  All  Intentional thiethylperazine overdose  Xa6Jq  All  Intentional chlorpromazine overdose  Xa6Ju  All  Intentional pipotiazine overdose  Xa6Jy  All  Intentional promazine overdose  Xa6K2 All Intentional thioridazine overdose Xa6K6All Intentional perphenazine overdose Xa6KAAll Intentional prochlorperazine overdose Xa6KEAll Intentional trifluoperazine overdose Xa6KJAll Intentional chlorprothixene overdose Xa6KNAll Intentional flupentixol decanoate overdose Xa6KRAll Intentional zuclopenthixol decanoate overdose Xa6KVAll Intentional zuclopenthixol overdose Xa6KZAll Intentional flupentixol overdose Xa6KdAll Intentional oxypertine overdose Xa6KhAll Intentional remoxipride overdose Xa6KjAll Intentional overdose of non-barbiturate hypnotic Xa6KoAll Intentional selegiline overdose Xa6KtAll Intentional amfetamine overdose Xa6KyAll Intentional antabuse overdose Xa6L3All Intentional cannabis overdose Xa6L7All Intentional overdose by lysergic acid Xa6LBAll Intentional psilocybin overdose Xa6LFAll Intentional mescaline overdose Xa6LJAll Intentional overdose of ecstasy Xa6LNAll Intentional overdose by cocaine Xa6LRAll Intentional overdose by crack cocaine Xa6LVAll Intentional caffeine overdose Xa6LbAll Intentional atenolol overdose Xa6LfAll Intentional propranolol overdose Xa6LhAll Intentional overdose of beta-adrenergic blocking drug Xa6LmAll Intentional phenoxybenzamine overdose Xa6LqAll Intentional nicotine overdose Xa6LuAll Intentional overdose by calcium-channel blockers Xa6LzAll Intentional pilocarpine overdose Xa6M3All Intentional acetylcholine overdose Xa6M7All Intentional anticholinesterase overdose Xa6MDAll Intentional metaraminol overdose Xa6MIAll Intentional salbutamol overdose Xa6MLAll Intentional overdose of isoprenaline Xa6MQAll Intentional clonidine overdose Xa6MVAll Intentional hyoscine overdose Xa6MZAll Intentional atropine overdose Xa6MeAll Intentional acetylcysteine overdose Xa6MjAll Intentional nikethamide overdose 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y   50   Xa6QB  All  Intentional sodium fusidate overdose  Xa6QF  All  Intentional spectinomycin overdose  Xa6QJ  All  Intentional vancomycin overdose  Xa6QN  All  Intentional trimethoprim overdose  Xa6QR All Intentional nitrofuran derivative overdose Xa6QVAll Intentional fusidic acid overdose Xa6QZAll Intentional 4-quinolones overdose Xa6QeAll Intentional ampicillin overdose Xa6QjAll Intentional cloxacillin overdose Xa6QnAll Intentional carbenicillin overdose Xa6QrAll Intentional flucloxacillin overdose Xa6QxAll Intentional cefadroxil overdose Xa6R1All Intentional cefalexin overdose Xa6R5All Intentional cephalothin overdose Xa6R9All Intentional cefazolin overdose Xa6RDAll Intentional cefradine overdose Xa6RHAll Intentional latamoxef overdose Xa6RMAll Intentional cefaclor overdose Xa6RQAll Intentional cefuroxime overdose Xa6RUAll Intentional cephamandole overdose Xa6RZAll Intentional cefotaxime overdose Xa6RdAll Intentional ceftazidime overdose Xa6RhAll Intentional ceftizoxime overdose Xa6RlAll Intentional cefixime overdose Xa6RpAll Intentional cefodizime overdose Xa6RtAll Intentional cefpodoxime overdose Xa6RxAll Intentional ceftriaxone overdose Xa6SAAll Intentional cefpirome overdose Xa6S1All Intentional ceftibuten overdose Xa6S5All Intentional cefsulodin overdose Xa6SGAll Intentional doxycycline overdose Xa6SKAll Intentional minocycline overdose Xa6SOAll Intentional oxytetracycline overdose Xa6SSAll Intentional tetracycline overdose Xa6SWAll Intentional chloramphenicol overdose Xa6SaAll Intentional co-trimoxazole overdose Xa6SfAll Intentional antimony compound overdose Xa6SjAll Intentional hydroxyquinoline overdose Xa6SpAll Intentional rifampin overdose Xa6StAll Intentional isoniazid overdose Xa6SxAll Intentional ethambutol overdose Xa6T1All Intentional antileprotic drug overdose Xa6T5All Intentional pesticide product overdose Xa6TBAll Intentional gamma globulin overdose Xa6TFAll Intentional vaccine overdose 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y   54   Xa4mC  All  Intentional fenbufen poisoning  Xa4mG  All  Intentional fenoprofen poisoning  Xa4mK  All  Intentional flurbiprofen poisoning  Xa4mN  All  Intentional ibuprofen poisoning  Xa4mQ  All  Intentional indometacin poisoning  Xa4mU All Intentional ketoprofen poisoning Xa4mYAll Intentional ketorolac poisoning Xa4mcAll Intentional mefenamic acid poisoning Xa4mgAll Intentional nabumetone poisoning Xa4mjAll Intentional naproxen poisoning Xa4mnAll Intentional nefopam poisoning Xa4mrAll Intentional oxyphenbutazone poisoning Xa4muAll Intentional phenylbutazone poisoning Xa4myAll Intentional piroxicam poisoning Xa4n2All Intentional sulindac poisoning Xa4n6All Intentional tenoxicam poisoning Xa4nAAll Intentional tiaprofenic acid poisoning Xa4nEAll Intentional tolmetin poisoning Xa4nJAll Intentional radiopharmaceutical poisoning Xa4nRAll Intentional X-ray contrast media poisoning Xa4nVAll Intentional magnetic resonance imaging contrast media poisoning Xa4nNAll Intentional X-ray diagnostic contrast media poisoning Xa4nZAll Intentional allergen extract vaccine poisoning Xa4ndAll Intentional diagnostic dye poisoning Xa53nAll Intentional dextromethorphan poisoning Xa53qAll Intentional guaifenesin poisoning Xa53tAll Intentional terpin hydrate poisoning Xa53wAll Intentional poisoning by bronchodilator drug Xa53zAll Intentional aminophylline poisoning Xa542All Intentional theophylline poisoning Xa545All Intentional poisoning by herbal asthma mixture Xa548All Intentional anti-common cold drug poisoning Xa54BAll Intentional local antipruritic poisoning Xa54EAll Intentional local astringent and detergent poisoning Xa54HAll Intentional hair treatment poisoning Xa54LAll Intentional allopurinol poisoning Xa54OAll Intentional colchicine poisoning Xa54RAll Intentional probenecid poisoning Xa54XAll Intentional gold salt poisoning Xa54aAll Intentional antirheumatic poisoning Xa54vAll Intentional chelating agent poisoning Xa54zAll Intentional alternative medicine poisoning Xa556All Intentional flucytosine poisoning Xa559All Intentional griseofulvin poisoning Xa55CAll Intentional amphotericin B poisoning 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y   56   Xa58U  All  Intentional cefpirome poisoning  Xa58X  All  Intentional cephaloridine poisoning  Xa58a  All  Intentional sulfadiazine poisoning  Xa58d  All  Intentional sulphafurazole poisoning  Xa58g  All  Intentional sulfamethoxazole poisoning  Xa58j All Intentional doxycycline poisoning Xa58mAll Intentional minocycline poisoning Xa58pAll Intentional oxytetracycline poisoning Xa58sAll Intentional tetracycline poisoning Xa58vAll Intentional chloramphenicol poisoning Xa58zAll Intentional co-trimoxazole poisoning Xa59FAll Intentional hydroxyquinoline poisoning Xa59IAll Intentional diiodohydroxyquinoline poisoning Xa59LAll Intentional rifampin poisoning Xa59OAll Intentional isoniazid poisoning Xa59RAll Intentional ethambutol poisoning Xa59UAll Intentional cycloserine poisoning Xa59YAll Intentional antileprotic drug poisoning Xa59bAll Intentional ethionamide poisoning Xa59eAll Intentional para-aminosalicylic acid poisoning Xa59hAll Intentional sulphone poisoning Xa59lAll Intentional pesticide product poisoning 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y   60   XaA8Y  All  Lacanian psychoanalysis  XaA8g  All  Group psychoanalysis  XaA8U All Bion-based group psychoanalysis 384Z.All Psychological analysis NOS Xa8IMAll Jungian-based therapy Xa8INAll Generic Jungian-based therapy Xa8IPAll Analytical psychology Xa8IRAll Long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy XaA8ZAll Developmental psychodynamic psychotherapy XaA8cAll Supportive expressive psychodynamic psychotherapy XaA8dAll Psychodynamic-interpersonal psychotherapy XaEVq All Psychodynamic psychotherapy Xad7CAll Focal psychodynamic therapy Xa8IRAll Long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy XaA8ZAll Developmental psychodynamic psychotherapy XaA8cAll Supportive expressive psychodynamic psychotherapy XaA8dAll Psychodynamic-interpersonal psychotherapy Xa8IIAll Short-term psychodynamic therapy XaXuc All Dynamic interpersonal therapy XaA9gAll Specific task orientated psychotherapy XE0iLAll Psychotherapy/sociotherapy 8G9Z.All Other psychotherapy NOS 8G9.. All Other psychotherapy 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 

Codes used to identify time off w ork and unemployment

Supplementary Supplementary 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 All Hypothyroidism due to iodide trapping defect X40HwAll Hypothyroidism due to iodide organification defect X40HxAll Hypothyroidism due to coupling defect X40HyAll Hypothyroidism due to deiodase defect X40HzAll Hypothyroidism due to thyroglobulin synthesis defect Cyu11All [X]Other specified hypothyroidism Xa3ecAll Hypothyroidism -congenital and acquired Xa08gAll Transient neonatal hypothyroidism Q4337All Neonatal jaundice with congenital hypothyroidism 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 All Other specified cellulitis and abscess M03y0

Definitions of atopic and autoimmune conditions w ith R ead code lists.

Supplementary 

Read V2 Code

Term ID Description J40.. All Regional enteritis-Crohn's disease J400.All Regional enteritis of the small bowel J4000All Regional enteritis of the duodenum J4001All Regional enteritis of the jejunum J4002 All Crohn's disease of the termnal ileum J4003All Crohn's disease of the ileum unspecified J4004All Crohn's disease of the ileum NOS J4005All Exacerbation of Crohn's disease of small intestine J400zAll Crohn's disease of the small bowel NOS J40.. All Crohn's disease J4010All Regional enteritis of the colon J4011All Regional enteritis of the rectum J4012All Exacerbation of Crohn's disease of large intestine J401zAll Crohn's disease of the largel bowel NOS J40z.AllAll Crohn's disease Xa0lhAll Regional enteritis X302rAll Crohn's jejunitis X302tAll Crohn's ileitis J4003 All Crohn's disease of the ileum unspecified J4004 All Crohn's disease of the ileum NOS J4002 All Crohn's disease of terminal ileum J400.All Regional enteritis of small bowel XaK6CAll Exacerbation of Crohn's disease of small intestine J400zAll Crohn's disease of the small bowel NOS J401.All Regional enteritis of the large bowel XE0afAll Crohn's disease of the large bowel NOS XaK6DAll Exacerbation of Crohn's disease of large intestine J40z.All Regional enteritis NOS J4010 All Crohn's colitis J4011 All Crohn's proctitis X3050All Perianal Crohn's disease Jyu40All [X]Other Crohn's disease J4001Y30FyRegional enteritis of the jejunum All Hypothyroidism due to iodide trapping defect X40HwAll Hypothyroidism due to iodide organification defect X40HxAll Hypothyroidism due to coupling defect X40HyAll Hypothyroidism due to deiodase defect X40HzAll Hypothyroidism due to thyroglobulin synthesis defect Cyu11All All Hypothyroidism due to iodide trapping defect X40HwAll Hypothyroidism due to iodide organification defect X40HxAll Hypothyroidism due to coupling defect X40HyAll Hypothyroidism due to deiodase defect X40HzAll Hypothyroidism due to thyroglobulin synthesis defect Cyu11All [X]Other specified hypothyroidism Xa3ecAll Hypothyroidism -congenital and acquired Xa08gAll Transient neonatal hypothyroidism Q4337All Neonatal jaundice with congenital hypothyroidism All Multiple sclerosis monitoring administration XaX9FAll Multiple sclerosis monitoring first letter XaX9HAll Multiple sclerosis monitoring second letter XaX9JAll Multiple sclerosis monitoring telephone invitation XaX9LAll Multiple sclerosis monitoring third letter F20.. All Multiple sclerosis XaP1VAll Secondary progressive multiple sclerosis XaP1BAll Relapsing and remitting multiple sclerosis XaP0rAll Primary progressive multiple sclerosis XaP0XAll Malignant multiple sclerosis XaOzZ All Benign multiple sclerosis X005cAll Acute relapsing multiple sclerosis X005dAll Chronic progressive multiple sclerosis X005eAll Remittent-progressive multiple sclerosis F200.All Multiple sclerosis of the brainstem F201.All Multiple sclerosis of the spinal cord F202.All Generalised multiple sclerosis Term ID Description H20.. All Viral pneumonia H200.All Pneumonia due to adenovirus H201.All Pneumonia due to respiratory syncytial virus H202.All Pneumonia due to parainfluenza virus H203.All Pneumonia due to human metapneumovirus H20y.All Viral pneumonia NEC H20y0All Severe acute respiratory syndrome H20z.All Viral pneumonia NOS H21.. All Lobar (pneumococcal) pneumonia H22.. All Other bacterial pneumonia H220.All Pneumonia due to klebsiella pneumoniae H221.All Pneumonia due to pseudomonas H222.All Pneumonia due to haemophilus influenzae H223.All Pneumonia due to streptococcus H2230All Pneumonia due to streptococcus, group B H224.All Pneumonia due to staphylococcus H22y.All Pneumonia due to other specified bacteria H22y0All Pneumonia due to escherichia coli H22y1All Pneumonia due to proteus H22y2All Pneumonia -Legionella H22y3All Pneumonia due to Gram negative bacteria H22yXAll Pneumonia due to other aerobic gram-negative bacteria H22yzAll Pneumonia due to bacteria NOS H22z.All Bacterial pneumonia NOS H23.. All Pneumonia due to other specified organisms H230.All Pneumonia due to Eaton's agent H231.All Pneumonia due to mycoplasma pneumoniae H232.All Pneumonia due to pleuropneumonia like organisms H233.All Chlamydial pneumonia H23z.All Pneumonia due to specified organism NOS H24.. All Pneumonia with infectious diseases EC H240.All Pneumonia with measles H241.All Pneumonia with cytomegalic inclusion disease H242.All Pneumonia with ornithosis H243.All Pneumonia with whooping cough H244.All Pneumonia with tularaemia H245.All Pneumonia with anthrax H246.All Pneumonia with aspergillosis All Acute viral bronchitis unspecified H060xAll Acute bacterial bronchitis unspecified H060zAll Acute bronchitis NOS H061.All Acute bronchiolitis H0610 All Acute capillary bronchiolitis H0611 All Acute obliterating bronchiolitis H0612All Acute bronchiolitis with bronchospasm H0613 All Acute exudative bronchiolitis H0614 All Obliterating fibrous bronchiolitis H0615 All Acute bronchiolitis due to respiratory syncytial virus H0616 All Acute bronchiolitis due to other specified organisms H0617All NULL H061zAll Acute bronchiolitis NOS H062.All NULL Term ID Description H20.. All Viral pneumonia H200.All Pneumonia due to adenovirus H201.All Pneumonia due to respiratory syncytial virus H202.All Pneumonia due to parainfluenza virus H203.All Pneumonia due to human metapneumovirus H20y.All Viral pneumonia NEC H20y0All Severe acute respiratory syndrome H20z.All Viral pneumonia NOS H21.. All Lobar (pneumococcal) pneumonia H22.. All Other bacterial pneumonia H220.All Pneumonia due to klebsiella pneumoniae H221.All Pneumonia due to pseudomonas H222.All Pneumonia due to haemophilus influenzae H223.All Pneumonia due to streptococcus H2230All Pneumonia due to streptococcus, group B H224.All Pneumonia due to staphylococcus H22y.All Pneumonia due to other specified bacteria H22y0All Pneumonia due to escherichia coli H22y1All Pneumonia due to proteus H22y2All Pneumonia -Legionella H22y3All Pneumonia due to Gram negative bacteria H22yXAll Pneumonia due to other aerobic gram-negative bacteria H22yzAll Pneumonia due to bacteria NOS H22z.All Bacterial pneumonia NOS H23.. All Pneumonia due to other specified organisms H230.All Pneumonia due to Eaton's agent H231.All Pneumonia due to mycoplasma pneumoniae H232.All Pneumonia due to pleuropneumonia like organisms H233.All Chlamydial pneumonia H23z.All Pneumonia due to specified organism NOS H24.. All Pneumonia with infectious diseases EC H240.All Pneumonia with measles H241.All Pneumonia with cytomegalic inclusion disease H242.All Pneumonia with ornithosis H243.All Pneumonia with whooping cough H244.All Pneumonia with tularaemia H245.All Pneumonia with anthrax H246.All Pneumonia with aspergillosis H247.All Pneumonia with other systemic mycoses All Acute viral bronchitis unspecified H060xAll Acute bacterial bronchitis unspecified H060zAll Acute bronchitis NOS H061.All Acute bronchiolitis H0610 All Acute capillary bronchiolitis H0611 All Acute obliterating bronchiolitis H0612 All Acute bronchiolitis with bronchospasm H0613 All Acute exudative bronchiolitis H0614 All Obliterating fibrous bronchiolitis H0615 All Acute bronchiolitis due to respiratory syncytial virus H0616 All Acute bronchiolitis due to other specified organisms H0617All NULL H061zAll Acute bronchiolitis NOS H062.All NULL All Larva migrans of skin Xa0kTAll Amoebic granuloma of skin Xa0QyAll Complicated donovanosis Xa0WsAll Staphylococcus aureus superficial folliculitis Xa139All Site-specific infective disorders of skin Xa13AAll Intertrigo Xa13CAll Submammary monilia Xa1y2All Abscess of toe All Acute amoebic dysentery A051.All Chronic intestinal amoebiasis A052.All Amoebic nondysenteric colitis A053.All Amoebic liver abscess A054.All Amoebic lung abscess A055.All Amoebic brain abscess A056.All Amoebic skin ulceration A05y.All Amoebic infection of other sites A05y0All Amoebic appendicitis A05y1All Amoebic balanitis A05y2All Amoeboma A05yzAll Amoebic infection of other sites NOS A05z.All 

Definitions of common infections w ith R ead code lists.

Supplementary All Acute non suppurative otitis media F5100All Acute otitis media with effusion F5101All Acute serous otitis media F5102All Acute mucoid otitis media F5103All Acute sanguinous otitis media F5104All Acute allergic serous otitis media F5105All Acute allergic mucoid otitis media F5106All Acute allergic sanguinous otitis media F510zAll Acute nonsuppurative otitis media NOS F52..All Suppurative and unspecified otitis media F520.All Acute suppurative otitis media F5200All Acute suppurative otitis media tympanic membrane intact F5201All Acute suppurative otitis media tympanic membrane ruptured F5203All Acute suppurative otitis media due to disease EC F520zAll Acute suppurative otitis media NOS F526.All Acute left otitis media F527.All Acute right otitis media F528.All Acute bilateral otitis media F52z.All Otitis media NOS H00..All Acute nasopharyngitis H01.. All Acute sinusitis H010.All Acute maxillary sinusitis H011.All Acute frontal sinusitis H012.All Acute ethmoidal sinusitis H013.All Acute sphenoidal sinusitis H014.All Acute rhinosinusitis H01y.All Other acute sinusitis H01y0All Acute pansinusitis H01yzAll Other acute sinusitis NOS H01z.All Acute sinusitis NOS H02..All Acute pharyngitis H020.All Acute gangrenous pharyngitis H021.All Acute phlegmonous pharyngitis H022.All Acute ulcerative pharyngitis All Acute pneumococcal pharyngitis H0231All Acute staphylococcal pharyngitis H023zAll Acute bacterial pharyngitis NOS H024.All Acute viral pharyngitis H025.All Allergic pharyngitis H02z.All Acute pharyngitis NOS H03..All Acute tonsillitis H030.All Acute erythematous tonsillitis H031.All Acute follicular tonsillitis H032.All Acute ulcerative tonsillitis H033.All Acute catarrhal tonsillitis H034.All Acute gangrenous tonsillitis H035.All Acute bacterial tonsillitis H0350All Acute pneumococcal tonsillitis H0351All Acute staphylococcal tonsillitis H035zAll Acute bacterial tonsillitis NOS H036.All Acute viral tonsillitis H037.All Recurrent acute tonsillitis H03z.All Acute tonsillitis NOS H04..All Acute laryngitis and tracheitis H040.All Acute laryngitis H0400All Acute oedematous laryngitis H0401All Acute ulcerative laryngitis H0402All Acute catarrhal laryngitis H0403All Acute phlegmonous laryngitis H0404All Acute haemophilus influenzae laryngitis H0405All Acute pneumococcal laryngitis H0406All Acute suppurative laryngitis H040wAll Acute viral laryngitis unspecified H040xAll Acute bacterial laryngitis unspecified H040zAll Acute laryngitis NOS H041.All Acute tracheitis H0410All Acute tracheitis without obstruction H0411All Acute tracheitis with obstruction H041zAll Acute tracheitis NOS H042.All Acute laryngotracheitis H0420All Acute laryngotracheitis without obstruction H0421All Acute laryngotracheitis with obstruction H042zAll Acute laryngotracheitis NOS H043.All Acute epiglottitis (non strep) H0430All Acute epiglottitis without obstruction All Acute obstructive laryngitis H043zAll Acute epiglottitis NOS H044.All Croup H04z.All Acute laryngitis and tracheitis NOS H05..All Cellulitis and abscess of head unspecified M03z.All Cellulitis and abscess NOS M03z0All Cellulitis NOS M03z1All Abscess NOS M03zzAll Cellulitis and abscess NOS M04.. All Acute lymphadenitis M040.All Acute lymphadenitis of trunk M041.All Acute lymphadenitis of upper limb M042.All Acute lymphadenitis of lower limb M043.All Acute lymphadenitis of face, head and neck M05.. All Impetigo M050.All Impetigo contagiosa unspecified M051.All Impetigo contagiosa bullosa M052.All Impetigo contagiosa gyrata M053.All Impetigo circinata M054.All Impetigo neonatorum M055.All Impetigo simplex M056.All Impetigo follicularis M057.All 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 All Larva migrans of skin Xa0kTAll Amoebic granuloma of skin Xa0QyAll Complicated donovanosis Xa0WsAll Staphylococcus aureus superficial folliculitis Xa139All Site-specific infective disorders of skin Xa13AAll Intertrigo Xa13CAll Submammary monilia Xa1y2All Abscess of toe All Abscess of eyelid XE1AaAll Cellulitis and abscess of leg XE1AbAll Cellulitis and abscess of foot excluding toe XE1AcAll Cellulitis and abscess of head unspecified XE1AdAll Acute lymphadenitis XE1AeAll Pilonidal cyst with no abscess XE1AgAll Other specified local infection of skin or subcutaneous tissue XE1AiAll Other specified local infection of skin and subcutaneous tissue NOS XE1AjAll Local infection skin/subcut tissue NOS XE1AkAll All Boil: (face) or (external auditory) or (external ear) XE1BgAll (Boil -upper arm and forearm) or (axillary furunculosis) XE1BiAll (Cellulitis &/or abscess finger/toe) or (felon -whitlow) XE1BJAll Superficial folliculitis XE1BkAll (Cellulitis -finger-paronychia) or (paronychia) XE1BmAll (Cellulitis/abscess: [NOS] or [other]) or (abscess NOS) XE1BoAll (Cellulitis/abscess -face) or (cellulitis -lips) 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60 

All

Other acute upper respiratory infections H050.All Acute laryngopharyngitis H051.All Acute upper respiratory tract infection H052.All Pharyngotracheitis H053.All Tracheopharyngitis H054.All Recurrent upper respiratory tract infection H055.All Pharyngolaryngitis H05y.AllOther upper respiratory infections of multiple sites H05z.All Upper respiratory infection NOS H0y..Other specified acute respiratory infections H0z..All Acute respiratory infection NOS Read CTV3 Code Term ID DescriptionOther acute upper respiratory infections H050.All Acute laryngopharyngitis H051.All NULL H052.All NULL H053.All Tracheopharyngitis H054.All Recurrent upper respiratory tract infection H055.All Pharyngolaryngitis H05y.All Other upper respiratory infections of multiple sites H05z.All Upper respiratory tract infection (& viral) NOS H0y..Other specified acute respiratory infections H0z..All Acute respiratory infection NOS X00iqAll Recurrent acute suppurative otitis media X00m1All Pott's puffy tumour X00mHAll Acute herpes simplex pharyngitis X00mIAll Acute herpes zoster pharyngitis X00mJAll Enteroviral lymphonodular pharyngitis X00mLAll Glandular fever pharyngitis X00mqAll Vincent's tonsillitis X00n1All Acute simple laryngitis X00n2All Vincent's laryngitis X00n4All Acute membranous laryngitis X00n5All Acute subglottic laryngitis X00n6All Recurrent allergic croup 

A3401

All Streptococcal laryngitis A3403All Streptococcal tonsillitis A740.All Herpangina AA12.All Vincent's angina -pharyngitis F51..All Non-suppurative otitis media with eustachian tube disorders F510.All Acute non-suppurative otitis media F5100All Acute otitis media: [with effusion] or [secretory] F5101All Acute non-suppurative otitis media -serous F5102All Acute non-suppurative otitis media -mucoid F5103All Acute non-suppurative otitis media -sanguinous F5104All Acute allergic serous otitis media F5105All Acute allergic mucoid otitis media F5106All Acute allergic sanguinous otitis media F510zAll Acute non-suppurative otitis media NOS F52..All Suppurative and unspecified otitis media F520.All Acute suppurative otitis media F5200All Acute suppurative otitis media -tympanic membrane intact F5201All Acute suppurative otitis media -tympanic membrane ruptured F5203All Acute suppurative otitis media due to disease EC F520zAll Acute suppurative otitis media NOS F526.All Acute left otitis media F527.All Acute right otitis media F528.All Acute bilateral otitis media F52z.All Ear infection &/or otitis media NOS FyuP0All [X]Other acute non-suppurative otitis media H00.. All (Acute nasopharyngitis or rhinitis) or (common cold) All Acute maxillary sinusitis H011.All Acute frontal sinusitis H012.All Acute ethmoidal sinusitis H013.All Acute sphenoidal sinusitis H014.All NULL H01y.All Other acute sinusitis H01y0All Acute pansinusitis H01yzAll Other acute sinusitis NOS H01z.All Acute sinusitis NOS H02.. All Acute gangrenous pharyngitis H021.All Acute phlegmonous pharyngitis H022.All Acute ulcerative pharyngitis H023.All Acute bacterial pharyngitis H0230All Acute pneumococcal pharyngitis H0231All Acute staphylococcal pharyngitis H023zAll Acute bacterial pharyngitis NOS H024.All Acute viral pharyngitis H025.All Allergic pharyngitis H02z.All Acute pharyngitis NOS H03..All Tonsillitis (& acute) H030.All Acute erythematous tonsillitis H031.All Acute follicular tonsillitis H032.All Acute ulcerative tonsillitis H033.All Acute catarrhal tonsillitis H034.All Acute gangrenous tonsillitis H035.All Acute bacterial tonsillitis H0350All Acute pneumococcal tonsillitis H0351All Acute staphylococcal tonsillitis H035zAll Acute bacterial tonsillitis NOS H036.All Acute viral tonsillitis H037.All Recurrent acute tonsillitis H03z.All Acute tonsillitis NOS H04..All NULL H040.All Acute laryngitis H0400All Acute oedematous laryngitis H0401All Acute ulcerative laryngitis H0402All Acute catarrhal laryngitis H0403All Acute phlegmonous laryngitis H0404All Acute haemophilus influenzae laryngitis H0405All Acute pneumococcal laryngitis All Acute viral laryngitis unspecified H040xAll Acute bacterial laryngitis unspecified H040zAll Acute laryngitis NOS H041.All Acute tracheitis H0410All Acute tracheitis without obstruction H0411All Acute tracheitis with obstruction H041zAll Acute tracheitis NOS H042.All Laryngotracheitis (& acute) H0420All Acute laryngotracheitis without obstruction H0421All Acute laryngotracheitis with obstruction H042zAll Acute laryngotracheitis NOS H043.All Epiglottitis: [viral] or [acute non streptococcal] H0430All Acute epiglottitis without obstruction H0431All Acute epiglottitis with obstruction H0432All NULL H043zAll Acute epiglottitis NOS H044.All NULL H04z.All Acute laryngitis and tracheitis NOS H05..

Introduction:

Alopecia Areata (AA) is a common cause of immune-mediated non-scarring hair loss. Links between AA and common mental health, autoimmune and atopic conditions, and common infections have previously been described but remain incompletely elucidated and contemporary descriptions of the epidemiology of AA in the UK are lacking.

Key words:

Alopecia areata, epidemiology, incidence, prevalence, common mental health conditions, depression, anxiety, autoimmune disease, atopic conditions, study protocol, common infections. Following the initial episode, the majority of those with limited patchy AA will experience spontaneous remission, but over 80% will have subsequent relapses.(7) Spontaneous remission has been reported to occur in less than 10% of those with extensive AA. This study series, using a large contemporary population-based sample aims to explore and describe many important elements of AA over four key areas: i) the 

Autoimmune and atopic comorbidities

A central theory in AA pathogenesis is that it is an autoimmune phenomenon resulting from a disruption of hair follicle 'immune privilege', where numerous There has also been interest in the prevalence of co-morbid atopy in patients with AA. The prevalence of atopy in patients with AA has been reported to be in the range of 11-38.2%(5) representing cohorts from the USA, India and Singapore . ( 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y   9 conditions, and a genome-wide association study established that IL-13 is also susceptible loci for AA. (30) 

Methods and analysis Data source

These studies will use routinely collected and collated data from the Oxford-Royal 

The incidence and lifetime prevalence of alopecia areata

We will describe the incidence and point prevalence of AA over [2009] [2010] [2011] [2012] [2013] [2014] [2015] [2016] [2017] [2018] inclusive, by age group, sex, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status, and geographical region. Ethnicity will be categorised as follows based on UK census categories:White, Asian, Black African/Caribbean, Mixed, and Other.(61) Index of multiple deprivation (IMD) will be used as a measure of socioeconomic status.(62)

Service utilisation in people with alopecia areata

We will assess primary care visit frequency, up to one year, in people newly diagnosed with AA compared to matched controls without AA. Measures of healthcare management will also be assessed in people newly diagnosed with AA up to one year, comprising; secondary care dermatology referrals (Supplementary   Table S1 .3, Additional file 2) and primary care prescriptions for AA treatments (Supplementary Table S1 .4, Additional file 2).

Patient and Public Involvement

The design of this protocol did not involve patients or this public. 

Mental health treatment and management patterns:

The burden of treatment for mental health conditions will be evaluated as the total percentage of people diagnosed with 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y   19 AA and prescribed, within one year of AA diagnosis, a medication used to treat mental health conditions (section 3.8) (e.g. SSRIs), grouped by mental health condition category.Management patterns will be evaluated by calculation of annual proportion of people referred for psychiatrist referral and counselling in people diagnosed with AA in the year following diagnosis (Supplementary Table S2 .10, Additional file 2).

Codes used to define alopecia areata and related clinical conditions, dermatology referrals, and treatments for alopecia areata w hich may be issued in primary care

Supplementary 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 * topical steroids will be grouped by potency; mild, moderate, potent, and very potent. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y 10

E294. All

Adjustment reaction with mixed disturbance of emotion and conduct E29y.All Other adjustment reactions E29y2All Adjustment reaction with physical symptoms E29y3 All Elective mutism due to an adjustment reaction E29y5All Other adjustment reaction with withdrawal E29yzAll Other adjustment reactions NOS E29z.All Adjustment reaction NOS Read CTV3 Code Term ID Description E29.. All Adjustment disorder E290.All Brief depressive adjustment reaction E290zAll Brief depressive reaction NOS E291.All Prolonged depressive adjustment reaction E2924 All Adjustment reaction with anxious mood E292yAll Adjustment reaction with mixed disturbance of emotion E293.All Adjustment reaction with predominant disturbance of conduct E2930 All Adjustment reaction with aggression E2931 All Adjustment reaction with antisocial behaviour E2932 All Adjustment reaction with destructiveness E293zAll Adjustment reaction with predominant disturbance of conduct NOSAdjustment reaction with mixed disturbance of emotion and conduct

E292. All

Adjustment reaction with predominant disturbance of other emotions E292zAll Adjustment reaction with disturbance of other emotion NOS E29y.All Other adjustment reactions 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 All Gouging own body parts Xa2nzAll Gouging own flesh Xa2o0All Gouging own eyes Xa2o1All Gouging own rectum Xa30DAll Gouging own vagina E2731 All Head-banging Xa2o2All Banging own head against object Xa2o3All Banging own head against own body parts Xa2pIAll Hitting self Xa2pJAll Punching self Xa2pKAll Slapping self X766S All Head-hitting Xa2p3All Inserting foreign bodies into own orifices Ua14QAll Self-electrocution Xa2pQAll Nipping self Xa2pMAll Picking own skin Xa2pRAll Pinching self Xa2pNAll Rubbing own skin X766T All Scratches self Xa303All Self-scalding Ua14NAll Self-incineration X766L All Self-mutilation X766MAll Self-mutilation of hands Xa2nlAll Self-mutilation of genitalia X766NAll Self-mutilation of penis X766OAll Self-mutilation of eyes Xa2nmAll Enucleation of own eyes X766PAll Self-mutilation of ears Xa2noAll Self-inducing a prolapse Xa2nqAll Breaking own bones Xa2nrAll Pulling own teeth out Xa2ntAll Eating own flesh Xa2nvAll All Suicide and selfinflicted injury by jumping from residential premises

