Introduction

Mitigation behaviors are key to preventing SARS-CoV-2 transmission. We identified behaviors associated with secondary transmission from confirmed SARS-CoV-2 primary cases to household contacts and described characteristics associated with reporting these behaviors.

Methods

Households with confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infections were recruited in California and Colorado from January to April 2021. Self-reported behaviors and demographic were collected through interviews. We investigated behaviors associated with transmission, and individual and household characteristics associated with behaviors, using univariable and multivariable logistic regression with Generalized Estimating Equations to account for household clustering.

Results

Among household contacts of primary cases, 43.3% (133/307) became infected with SARS-CoV-2. Upon adjusted analysis, household contacts who slept in the same bedroom with the primary case (aOR: 2.19, 95% CI: 1.25, 3.84) and ate food prepared by the primary case (aOR: 1.98 95% CI: 1.02, 3.87) had

INTRODUCTION

In early 2021, the United States (U.S.) saw a steady decline of COVID-19 cases, followed by a resurgence in July 2021, due to the Delta variant, and December 2021, from the Omicron variant. 1,2 Transmission has been reported in numerous settings, including prisons 3, 4 and schools 5, 6 yet household contact remains a major source of transmission of COVID-19. 7 The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends mitigation measures to reduce household transmission risk when caring for and interacting with persons who are confirmed to be infected with COVID-19 at home. These measures include, when possible, avoiding physical contact with the infected person, limiting shared activities and items, wearing a mask, and practicing appropriate hand hygiene. 8 Household contacts of SARS-CoV-2 cases are also encouraged to self-monitor their health status, wear a mask when around others for 10 full days at home and in public, and undergo testing for SARS-CoV-2 at least five full days after last exposure regardless of vaccination status, while unvaccinated household contacts are also encouraged to quarantine. 9 If household contacts develop symptoms, they should get tested immediately and isolate. 9In December 2020 COVID-19 vaccines became available in the U.S. with priority given to individuals who were immunocompromised, elderly, or considered high-risk for exposure (e.g., healthcare workers). 10 Individual uptake of mitigation behaviors has changed throughout the pandemic, and adherence to the recommended mitigation behaviors against SARS-CoV-2 transmission has been influenced by complex factors posing unique challenges at the individual-, household-, and community-level. [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] For example, the US COVID-19 Trends and Impact Survey found adherence to mitigation behaviors when a high number of COVID-19 cases were reported and less adherence when COVID-19 cases were low. 14 Additionally, guidance on mitigation behaviors have changed in relation to the waves of reported cases within the US which likely impacted adherence to these measures over time. Several studies on SARS-CoV-2 transmission in households have examined the impact of specific factors (e.g. demographics and mitigation behaviors) on secondary infection risk in the United States and globally. [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] However, there is limited research focusing on predicting factors among household members engaging in mitigation behaviors.Investigating behaviors that increase or mitigate risks of SARS-CoV-2 transmission in households may provide insight on important and effective public health interventions in affected households. In this paper, we 1) identified self-reported behaviors associated with household secondary transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and 2) described characteristics associated with engaging in these specific behaviors.

Study Sample

Details of household and individual enrollment for this investigation have been previously published. 22 Briefly, a SARS-CoV-2 household transmission investigation was conducted from January to April, 2021 at two sites: San Diego County, California and metropolitan Denver, Colorado. These sites were chosen because the public health departments and testing laboratories at these sites had established protocols in identifying household SARS-CoV-2 cases quickly during the increase in SARS-CoV-2 variant circulation when this investigation occurred, and there was agreement between these health departments to collaborate on data collection with the CDC. Individuals positive for SARS-CoV-2 by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) were identified through community testing by the local health department at each site. Households with an RT-PCR confirmed case of SARS-CoV-2 were contacted to determine enrollment eligibility. Full details of household selection are reported elsewhere. 22 Household eligibility included having a non-hospitalized case with illness onset ≤10 days prior to enrollment and at least one household contact. Illness onset date was defined as symptom onset date, or, if asymptomatic, date of first positive SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR test. A household contact was defined as a person who spent at least one night in the household during the infectious period (2 days before and 10 days after illness onset) of the primary case. A primary case was defined as the RT-PCR positive individual in the household with the earliest illness onset.Each household was followed for 15 days (days 0 to 14). On day 0 (date of first home visit), trained interviewers collected data on demographic information and self-reported behaviors from all household contacts. On day 0 and 14, all household members had specimens collected including nasopharyngeal (NP) swabs and blood serum. All NP swabs were tested for SARS-CoV-2 by RT-PCR (TaqPath COVID-19Combo Kit or PerkinElmer New Coronavirus Nucleic Acid Detection Kit) and serum was tested for SARS-CoV-2-specific antibodies (using Anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG Reagent Pack, xMAP SARS-CoV-2 Multi-Antigen IgG Assay, or Alinity SARS-CoV-2 IgG test). Symptom diaries were completed daily by all household members during enrollment. Parents/guardians completed symptom diaries for children unable to complete the form. On day 14, trained interviewers conducted a closeout questionnaire. Additional specimens were collected from all household members during interim visits prompted by the onset of a new symptom identified by a household member. Household contacts who withdrew or were lost to follow-up were excluded. Households with multiple primary cases, or where the primary case was not the first confirmed case reported in the household, were also excluded.

Measures

Secondary transmission: Secondary cases were household contacts who tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 by RT-PCR or seroconverted during the investigation period.Behavioral practices: Household contacts were asked behavioral questions on their interaction with the primary case regarding mask use, physical contact, and shared activities (Appendix Table 1 ). The questions began with "Since the [date of illness onset of the primary case] up to and including today, how often did you… [behavior] " and included 4 response levels on a Likert scale (1=Never, 2=Some of the time, 3=Most of the time, 4=Always). For analysis, responses were re-categorized with "Never" recoded as "No" and the remaining 3 responses as "Yes".Individual characteristics: Demographic information (age, sex, race or ethnicity, education level, vaccination status, and relationship to the primary case) was collected on day 0. For analysis, race or ethnicity were combined into Non-Hispanic White, Hispanic or Latino, and other (combination of the remaining Non-Hispanic races reported), due to limited sample size. For analysis, education was combined into 4 levels including no degree, high school degree, associate's, technical or bachelor's degree, and advanced degree. The COVID-19 vaccines available at the time of the investigation included the two-dose messenger RNA (mRNA) vaccines, Pfizer-BioNTech 23 

Statistical Analysis

Characteristics of household contacts were stratified by case status. Logistic regression models were constructed to investigate: 1) association between case status (i.e., secondary transmission) and selfreported behaviors, and 2) associations between self-reported behaviors and individual/household characteristics. Generalized Estimating Equations (GEE) 27 were used with an exchangeable working correlation and binomial distribution to account for clustering of household contacts.Univariable analysis was initially performed to determine which behavior variables were associated with secondary transmission. Behavior variables from univariable analysis with a p-value <0.25 were initially included in the multivariable analysis, followed by removal of behaviors with the highest p-value until only behavior variables with a p-value <0.05 remained in the model. Potential confounders (age, sex, race or ethnicity, and vaccination status) were assessed after selection of behaviors by individual addition to the final multivariable model. Confounders were included in the final multivariable model if they either changed estimated odds ratios by >10% or decreased Quasi-likelihood under the Independence model Criterion (QIC) indicating improved model fit.To determine household and individual characteristics associated with behaviors impacting secondary transmission, we modeled behaviors associated with case status in the final multivariable model. Model selection was also performed using the same p-value criterion as described above to select household and individual characteristics for inclusion in the final multivariable analysis.Demographic reference groups (except age) were based on lower trend of SARS-CoV-2 infection 28 or greater social advantages. 29 A two-sided p<0.05 was considered statistically significant. Records with missing data were excluded from analysis and noted in results. Data analysis was performed using SAS version 9.4 software (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA).

Ethical considerations

Adults provided written consent, and minors over the age of seven years provided assent and parental consent. Parental consent was obtained for minors under the age of seven years. This activity was reviewed by CDC and was conducted consistent with applicable federal law and CDC policy  .

RESULTS

Of the 122 households with 122 primary cases, a total of 307 household contacts were analyzed ( Figure   1 ). Ages ranged from 1 month to 83 years of age with a median age of 31 years ( On univariable analysis household contacts between 18-49 years of age had increased odds of SARS-CoV-2 infection compared to those 50 years of age and above (OR: 2.13, 95% CI: 1.07, 4.24) ( Table 2) .Household contacts who used the same bathroom as the primary case had increased odds of SARS-CoV-2 infection compared to those who did not use the same bathroom (OR: 2.15, 95% CI: 1.31, 3.54).Household contacts who slept in the same bed as the primary case had increased odds of SARS-CoV-2 infection compared to those who did not sleep in same bed (OR: 2.03, 95% CI: 1. 19, 3.45) . Household contacts who traveled in the vehicle as primary case with mask off also had increased odds of infection Through univariable analysis, household contacts with no high school degree had decreased odds of having slept in the same bedroom as the primary case compared to those with a post-college degree (OR: 0.35, 95% CI: 0.17, 0.75) ( Table 3) . Household contacts with children in the home had decreased odds of having slept in the same bedroom as the primary case compared to those with no children in the home (OR: 0.47 95% CI: 0.25, 0.88). After model selection, the final multivariable analysis included the following characteristics: age, race or ethnicity, relationship to the primary case, and household dimension. Upon adjusted analysis, household contacts who lived in homes ≤2000 ft 2 had increased odds of having slept in the same bedroom as the primary case compared to household contacts who lived in homes >2000 ft 2 (aOR: 3.97, 95% CI: 1.73, 9.10). All relationships to primary case had significantly lower odds of having slept in the same bedroom as the primary case compared to the partner of the primary case. Household contacts <50 years of age had increased odds of having slept in the same bedroom as the primary case compared to household contacts 50 years of age and above.Hispanic or Latino household contacts had lower odds of having slept in the same bedroom compared to Non-Hispanic White household contacts (aOR: 0.23, 95% CI: 0.06, 0.92).Through univariable analysis, parents, siblings, and other relationships (extended family, friends, or roommate) of the primary case had decreased odds of having eaten food prepared by the primary case compared to partners (Table 3) . After model selection, the final multivariable analysis included education and relationship to primary case. Upon adjusted analysis, parents, siblings, and other relationships (extended family, friends, or roommate) had decreased odds of having eaten food prepared by the primary case compared to partners. Household contacts with a technical, associate, or bachelor's degree had decreased odds of having eaten food prepared by the primary case compared to those with a post-college degree (aOR: 0.44, 95% CI: 0.23, 0.82). 

This investigation examined the behaviors of individuals living with a person with SARS-CoV-2 infection

(primary case). Household SARS-CoV-2 secondary transmission has been documented in multiple studies 7, 17, 19, 30, 31 therefore underscoring the importance of addressing effective mitigation in this setting.Sleeping in the same bedroom with the primary case significantly increased secondary transmission to household contacts in this investigation. In particular, the relationship to primary case was found to be a significant characteristic of sleeping in the same bedroom. Among all the relationships assessed, partners of the primary case were most likely to sleep in the same bedroom of the primary case compared to other relationships in a household. This finding is similar to that reported in a study in Brunei which focused on transmission in different settings. 32 The nature of the relationship between parent-child, married couples, and roommate is such that shared activities (e.g., sleeping in the same bed or bedroom) are commonplace. 33, 34 Eating food prepared by the primary case also significantly increased secondary transmission among household contacts in this investigation. It is worth noting that restaurant closures and stay-at-home policies during the pandemic have resulted in shifts to food preparation in the home. 35, 36 There is no evidence that SARS-CoV-2 is spread though food but rather transmission may occur when a household member gathers with family. 37 Eating food prepared by the primary case may therefore reflect the risk of the primary case not isolating. Parents, siblings, and others related to the primary case were noted as less likely to eat food prepared by the primary case. It is possible they prepared the meals for the primary case. Although we found an association between education level and eating food prepared by the primary case, there was no observable trend. Within the education levels, factors such as risk perception, attitude towards the behavior, knowledge about the behavior as it relates to COVID-19, may have played a role in the reported finding but were not accounted for in our analysis.CDC has issued public health recommendations for prevention of household transmission of SARS-CoV-2; 8 however, adherence to these recommendations continues to be a challenge. The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted lives globally resulting in stressful situations that require social support. 38 There may therefore be practical challenges with restricting shared activities among household contacts that may increase exposure to the primary case. For example, a study in Nigeria reported overcrowding in small homes posing challenges to adhering with mitigation behaviors. 39 The investigation showed that household dimension was associated with sleeping in the same bedroom as the primary case.Households with small dimensions may encounter challenges of isolating cases if, for example, the number of people living in the household is large or if there is only one bedroom in the household, characteristics not examined in this investigation. Compounding these challenges, households may be frustrated and fatigued from efforts to follow the recommended mitigation practices 15,40 as the pandemic progresses beyond two years.This investigation occurred during the initial phase of the SARS-CoV-2 vaccine introduction in early 2021.Thus, a small percentage of participants were partially vaccinated and even fewer fully vaccinated. The analysis showed vaccination status was associated with non-significant decreased risks of secondary transmission; however, the number of vaccinated persons at that point in the pandemic was small and statistical power was likely limited. Vaccines have been shown to be safe and efficacious in preventing serious morbidity and reducing risk of mortality by SARS-CoV-2. 41-43 Mitigation should therefore complement effective preventive behaviors and vaccination. 44, 45 Engaging in healthy behavior can be complex and different factors play a role in motivating individuals. 46 Although half of the household contacts who were secondary cases never used masks in the same room or had direct physical contact with the primary case, the findings showed no association with secondary transmission. This finding does not imply these behaviors are not associated with secondary transmission. A potential reason could be that transmission may have occurred before household contacts and primary cases were aware of infection and could have little to do with adherence to mitigation recommendations. Individuals not wearing masks may have done so at a distance from the primary case. Furthermore, when in direct physical contact with the primary case, household contacts may have engaged in effective hygiene practices -all of which are encouraged in CDC guidelines for preventing the spread of SARS-CoV-2. 8 Additionally, the small sample size of the investigation may have limited power to detect multiple behaviors associated with transmission or interactions between behaviors.The findings suggest the need to develop messaging that promotes adherence to effective mitigation measures for varying household settings such as increasing air circulation by opening windows or using a fan, frequent hand washing, sleeping in a separate room, and, if not possible, wearing masks inside the home or isolating the primary case in another dwelling (makeshift isolation sites). This will be key as the pandemic continues to evolve with the possible emergence of new variants, the potential increase in the number of confirmed cases, and individuals choosing to recover in their homes.

Limitations

The findings from this investigation should be interpreted with the following limitations. First, the behaviors were self-reported, and individuals may have provided socially desirable responses or were unable to recall their actual behaviors. Second, the investigation used a convenience sample, which limits the generalizability of the findings. Furthermore, because this investigation was conducted in early 2021 near the beginning of SARS-CoV-2 vaccine introductions, the findings are not generalizable to the current context in which vaccine induced and natural immunity are higher. Third, due to eligibility criteria of illness onset ≤10 days prior to enrollment, we assumed all secondary cases were infected by the primary case; we cannot rule-out the possibility of tertiary (contact-to-contact) transmission. Fourth, our investigation did not consider the age of children in the household (specifically young children), a characteristic that may have played a role in the findings on sharing a bed with the primary case and eating food prepared by the primary case. Lastly, we were unable to make inferences on race or ethnicity given the small sample size of our investigation.

CONCLUSIONS

We found that sleeping in the same bedroom as and eating food prepared by the primary case were significantly associated with secondary transmission. Household dimension and relationship to primary case were associated with these behaviors. These characteristics describe current mitigation efforts and limited options for mitigation behaviors of members within a household. Mitigation efforts should strongly emphasize feasible measures while recognizing challenges posed on individuals in households of a confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection. Our findings underscore the importance of implementing innovative means to promote adherence to mitigation measures that reduce household transmission. 

