

3 Table S1 The lattice parameters (in Angstrom) and crystal structures of the materials used in our work. Relatively large 2θ-range XRD curves are shown in Figure S1 . As can be seen, all the sharp peaks with high intensity commonly reported in literature belong to substrate mica (00L). 4 The pattern for the thin heterostructure only has two broad peaks around 25.1 o and 51.5 o , corresponding to (0003) and (0006) of α -GeTe, respectively. Absence of diffraction from other crystal planes indicates good c-axis out-of-plane orientation of GeTe on mica. However, in heterostructure with thicker GeTe film, another shoulder peak around 53.3 o is present, which can be indexed as GeTe (04 ). 42 Figure S2 . RHEED patterns of (a) the mica substrate, (b) 60 nm of Bi 2 Te 3 , (c) ( Figure S2a shows the typical dots pattern of cleaved mica surface obtained by in-situ reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) with an azimuth parallel to [1 0] axis. 5 The dots 1 pattern of the smooth mica surface changes quickly to a streaky and sharp pattern at the beginning of Bi 2 Te 3 deposition, which signifies a high-quality textured film. This high quality is also confirmed by the smooth surface shown by the AFM image depicted in Figure S3a . One can notice that the RHEED pattern of GeTe sublayer after 5 nm deposition on the top of 4 nm Bi 2 Te 3 sublayer still keeps streaky features, but the length of the stripes grow longer and the intensities become weaker. After 5 nm of GeTe growth however, the stripy pattern gradually gives way to dots due to the change from 2D to 3D growth, which causes the increase of roughness. This growth mode is in agreement with the report by Stranski et al. 6 Figure S3 . AFM tapping mode images of (a) 60 nm Bi 2 Te 3 , (b) ( A 60 nm Bi 2 Te 3 film as grown on mica is floated off and captured on a Quantifoil grid. In overview bright-field TEM images of this film in plan-view orientation reproducible bending contour patterns can be observed in the holes of the Quantifoil grid like shown in Figure S4a . As the holes provide less supporting force to the film, they form a weakly concave bending surface in each hole when we transfer the floated film to the grid. Therefore, a regular bending pattern of the Bi 2 Te 3 film occurs in each hole. The six-fold symmetry observed for the bending pattern in each hole nicely demonstrates the highly textured nature of the film with c-axis out-of-plane. A typical high magnification image of 60 nm Bi 2 Te 3 film is shown in Figure S4b . Comparing with GeTe film (in Figure S5d ), no voids were observed for the Bi 2 Te 3 film. One should notice that (low-angle) domain boundaries are observed in the image, which means that the Bi 2 Te 3 film is not truly single crystal even though distinct 'single crystalline' RHEED patterns can be observed with different azimuth. The detailed structure of the mica/(4nm)Bi 2 Te 3 /(28nm)GeTe heterostructure film is analyzed using HAADF-STEM, of which a cross-sectional overview is shown in Figure S5a . As is well-known, mica is a good substrate for high quality film growth, but quite sensitive to the electron beam of the TEM, creating an obstacle for (S)TEM characterization. At the left edge of the overview image, in the dark area, the atomic structure of mica or film can therefore not be observed. Hence, we deduce that the mica/Bi 2 Te 3 interface was damaged by the ion beam during TEM lamella preparation or by the electron beam during imaging. In fact, during viewing of the mica, in order to align it accurately into the zone axis, it becomes amorphous in the area viewed (not shown here). Still, the zone axis alignment allows the Bi 2 Te 3 seed layer (the first two quintuple layers) to be clearly visible. In addition, bilayer defects are found in these layers, similar to the ones observed earlier for Sb 2 Te 3 /GeTe superlattices. 8 An example is highlighted in Figure  S5a as confined between the orange vectors. The high-resolution image of the Bi 2 Te 3 -GeTe interface and corresponding line-scan are shown in Figure S5b . The lateral extension of vdWaals gaps in Bi 2 Te 3 quintuple layers, as well as the root mean square (RMS) roughness value of less than 1 nm in thick Bi 2 Te 3 film ( Figure S3a ) confirm that high-quality layer by layer growth of Bi 2 Te 3 films is achieved on mica by PLD. Also, perfect Te-Ge bonding at the interface between Bi 2 Te 3 and GeTe can be observed. It is measured from the line-scan that both the Bi 2 Te 3 quintuple and GeTe bilayer thickness at the interface (10.28 Å and 3.61 Å, respectively) is larger than the bulk value (10.15 Å and 3.55 Å, respectively). 1,2 This can be explained by the fact that beam damage on mica causes some bending of the lamella giving rise to a systematic error in the thickness measurement. This is probably also the reason that the exponentially decaying strain evolution in the GeTe cannot be extracted from the present STEM results. Still, the intensity of Ge and Te atomic columns close to the Bi 2 Te 3 quintuples (in the left part of the image) are sharp and distinct while the intensity of columns close to the GeTe surface (in the right part) is non-uniform and obscure, which can be attributed to the GeTe (000L) distorted planes. From Figure S5c it becomes apparent that this transition starts after about 5 nm growth of GeTe and slowly exacerbates the quality of the out-of-plane texture, in agreement with the streaky and dotty RHEED pattern as presented in Figure S2c and d. This fact again supports the observation that very thin GeTe films, which do not exhibit oblique peaks in the XRD pattern, show a better texture. Thus, it can be deduced that epitaxial GeTe thin films grow via a 2D-3D (Stranski-Krastanov) growth mode. 6 Figure S5d shows a typical plan-view image of this Bi 2 Te 3 /GeTe heterostructure for a GeTe film thickness of 28 nm. The film contains some voids, as seen by the bright spots highlighted by white arrows. This is not observed for Bi 2 Te 3 films ( Figure  S4 ), which can also be attributed to the different growth modes in these two films (more 2D for Bi 2 Te 3 and 3D for GeTe). In spite of sharp interfaces and the highly textured orientation on the mica substrate, the polycrystalline morphology, which are actually domains with small mutual in-plane tilts, are clearly observable in these GeTe films grown on mica (see Figure S5d ). Contrary to the GeTe film grown with MBE on Si (111)-H, absence of transrotational domains illustrate the high quality growth of GeTe in the present heterostructure, which is similar to GeTe grown on Si (111)-Sb. 9 Moreover, perfect GeTe crystalline bilayers directly at the onset of the growth can testify this. 

