S1: Study Location and Background health data

Mzuzu is one of the four cities in Malawi, with a population of 221,272 (National Statistics Office, 2018). Mzuzu health centre also known as Mapale or Mzimba North Health centre is stituated at the City centre of Mzuzu city while Mzuzu Central Hospital is situated at around 4 km Northwards of the city. The health centre currently serves almost the whole city as a primary health care point while the central hospital is regional referral tertiary hospital serving six districts in the northern region, over hundred health centres and serving a population of over 1.9 million people. It also serves as a secondary healthcare facility for the local (Mzuzu city) population. The majority (98.0%) of our participants were from Mapale health centre. The Central hospital initially served as a primary healthcare facility also but prior to commencement of the study the local health authority decided to maintain it as a secondary care facility only. Therefore it introduced a "bypass fee" where patients who attended the hospital clinics without being referred from a health centre/district hospital were charged MK 1,500 (approxmately 2 Euros). This led to Mapale becoming the main site of recruitment due to the focus on recruiting patients from primary care and before they had 8.5% (6.6-10.7%). Survey data indicates 64.8% of HIV-infected mothers and 46.9% of HIVexposed infants received some form of antiretroviral prophylaxis 2 .

S2: Microbiology

S2a Microbiology techniques

Blood cultures

The blood culture samples were inoculated into the Bactec Peds Plus/F Culture vial (Becton Dickinson Diagnostic Instrument Systems). These bottles were incubated in an automated blood culture Bactec™ 9050 which was set at protocol limits of maximum of 7 days to declare the sample negative if no growth has been detected. All positive blood cultures were further subcultured on to agar plates and identified using traditional phenotypic methods (Blood agar, MacConkey and Chocolate agar plate) and Vitek 2 microbial detection system (Biomerieux)

Bacterial PCR

The Masterpure TM complete DNA and RNA purification kit as well as QIA Symphony 

