

In February 2020, Masih Daneshvari Hospital reported its first COVID-19 patient and became the referral center for COVID-19 cases in Iran. The pursuing high load of patients was inevitably associated with a significant mortality of patients in the intensive care unit (ICU) due to severe ARDS (4) . Data suggests that increased mortality of COVID-19 patients is associated with a profound systemic inflammatory response (5) .Various cytokines are linked to COVID-19 and associated with COVID-19 induced lung injury and ARDS.The production of a wide array of proinflammatory cytokines is significantly elevated in patients with COVID-19 compared to healthy individuals (6) . Hypercytokinemia, also known as a cytokine storm, is shown to be related to an alarming incidence of ARDS and critical illness requiring ICU admission. Plasma levels of several cytokines in COVID-19 patients could serve as potential biomarkers of disease severity in COVID-19 (7) . These findings have demonstrated the immunopathological mechanisms of COVID-19 (8) .Various therapeutic techniques should be applied to control the inflammatory storm as confounding factors exist in patients with ARDS requiring invasive mechanical ventilation (IMV). Hemoperfusion (HP) and continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) can increase inflammatory cytokine elimination from the bloodstream and modulate immune function and, thus, improve patient prognosis (9) .In this study, we aimed to assess the effects of CRRT, HP, and their combination on mortality in COVID-19 patients undergoing IMV admitted to Masih Daneshvari Hospital in Tehran, Iran. Various clinical indices, including the time of treatment and biochemical parameters, were analyzed to assess the effects of HP and CRRT on the patient survival and to compare the effects of these techniques to remove plasma inflammatory factors. Patients were divided into three groups (HP, CRRT, and HP+CRRT) based on their initial kidney function, glomerular filtration rate (GFR), and neutrophil gelatinaseassociated lipocalin (NGAL) as a specific biomarker of acute kidney injury (AKI), diagnosed by an increase in the serum creatinine (SCr) level of at least 0.3 mg/dL within 48 hours. Estimated GFR (eGFR) in the HP group was > 60 mL/min. In the setting of AKI, CRRT was performed. Two patients were in the HP group, four patients were in the CRRT group and six patients were in the HP+CRRT group.

Study design and participants

All clinical data were recorded and standardized in a spreadsheet by two critical care physicians who were unaware of the purpose of this study. 

Blood purification

HP and/or CRRT therapies were initiated to improve O 2 saturation and reduce proinflammatory cytokine levels (10, 11) . 

Data collection

For every patient, sequential (sepsis-related) organ failure assessment (SOFA) score, and acute physiology and 

Data analysis

Results were presented as mean ± standard deviation.A P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Table 1 The overall mortality was 66.6% (8 out of 12 patients).

RESULTS

Mortality rates were 50% in the HP group (n=2), 100% in the CRRT group (n=4), and 50% in the HP+CRRT group (n=6). The HP+CRRT group had the best overall primary and secondary outcomes. The Cox proportional hazards model for overall survival is shown in figure 2. 

Consent for publication

Patients and/or next of kin provided consent for participation and publication of clinical data.All authors approved the final manuscript and consented for publication.

Availability of supporting data

All the data provided in the manuscript no additional supporting data.

Competing interests

Not applicable.

Funding

Not applicable.

