Introduction

In recent years, the rapid development of nanozymes based on enzyme-like activity of inorganic nanomaterials, especially metallic nanoparticles/nanoclusters containing biocompatible elements (e. g., Au and Pt), has gained considerable attention, owing to potential applications in biomedical fields [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] . Under mild reaction conditions (e. g., physiological temperature and aqueous phase media), these metallic nanomaterials could catalyze the oxidations of chromogenic enzyme substrates with environmentally benign oxidants including molecular oxygen (O 2 ) and hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), exhibiting same behavior as oxidases and peroxidases. Besides eco-friendliness of the catalytic system, many of metallic nanozymes demonstrated simplicity of preparation and satisfactory stability, which overcome several intrinsic drawbacks of enzymes [6] , thus attractive for both biochemical industry and laboratory research. For example, via a simple NaBH 4 reduction method, Ahmed et al. obtained the positively-charged cysteamine stabilized Au nanoparticles [7] , which exhibited good peroxidase-like activity in the oxidation of 3,3',5,5'-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB), yielding typical blue products readily observed by naked eyes. After conjugation of Au nanoparticles (NPs) with influenza virus-specific antibodies, a colorimetric assay was successfully applied to the detection of clinically isolated influenza virus (H3N2), which afforded a LOD of 11.62 plaque forming units (PFU) mL -1 , two orders of magnitude sensitive than conventional enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and the commercial kit. Therefore, with advantages of convenience, reliability, and practicality, metallic nanozymes provide a useful platform for colorimetric biosensing.Despite broad prospect of metallic nanozymes in biomedical areas, there is still much room to boost their activities, which is crucial to efficient utilization of metal atoms. In this goal, to develop multimetallic nanozymes has become an effective strategy. Previous studies presented that, the introduction of other metals into metallic NPs to construct the multimetallic nanostructures (e. g., alloy [8, 9] and core-shell structures [10, 11] ), contributed to an enhancement of enzymatic activity, depending on their composition, morphology and size. However, the comprehensive mechanism still lacks sufficient investigation, which is of importance to fully exert the biocatalytic capacities, in terms of ever-growing demands for practical applications.Currently, the world is combating coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), a novel human infectious disease arisen from severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) [12] . For global spread epidemic, the accurate diagnosis with rapidity, simplicity, and low cost, is the primary focus of attention. Several diagnostic methodologies based on plasmonic photothermal effect and localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) sensing transduction [13] , reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) [14] , electrochemical [15] , graphene-based field-effect transistor (FET) [16] , and immunofluorimetric assay [17] , have been developed. Despite high sensitivity, the first one fails to achieve desired reproducibility in large batches of testing, while others require specific conditions, high testing costs and professional analytical skills, thus unfavorable for point-of-care (POC) test. Intriguingly, Ventura et al. proposed a colorimetric method based on Au NP interaction induced by SARS-CoV-2, which gave rise to the variation of extinction spectrum of corresponding solution in a few minutes, demonstrating potential applications of colorimetric assays in fast and reliable detection of SARS-CoV-2 [18] . To develop a colorimetric assay based on metallic nanozymes for spike (S1) protein of SARS-Cov-2 is anticipated for the POC diagnosis, but less explored to date.Herein, we report superior peroxidase-catalysis of Au@Pt NPs conjugated by the polyclonal antibodies, which allowed sensitive colorimetric detection of spike (S1) protein of SARS-CoV-2 ( Fig. 1) . To access the Au@Pt NPs, the uniform and monodispersed Au NPs as seeds were first prepared, followed by in situ reduction of the Pt 4+ ions on the surface of Au NPs, creating a core-shell nanostructure with porous characteristics. Interestingly, the as-obtained Au@Pt NPs showed remarkably enhanced peroxidase-catalysis. Importantly, the introduction of Pt atoms into Au NPs leaded to a significant change in the enzyme-catalysis pathway, from reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation to fast electron transfer (ET) process. Benefiting from outstanding peroxidase-like activity of Au@Pt NPs, a colorimetric assay for detection of S1 protein of SARS-Cov-2 was then proposed, on a basis of ELISA described as follows (see details in experimental section). Firstly, the as-obtained Au@Pt NPs were functionalized by the antibodies. Afterwards, the capture antibodies were immobilized onto the 96-wells plate, in which the detected antigen was anchored to the specific sites and the bovine serum albumin (BSA) was used to block the remaining unbound sites. Finally, the antibody-functionalized Au@Pt NPs were introduced to attach the antigen, which catalyzed TMB oxidation and realized the detection of the target antigen. The work provides a colorimetric assay based on the metallic nanozyme-catalysis for sensitive detection of S1 protein of SARS-CoV-2. 

Instruments

The morphology of NPs was characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, FEI Tecnai G2 F20 U-TWIN). The crystal structure of NPs was determined by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD, Bruker D8 focus). The composition of NPs was measured by the inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES, Thermo Scientific iCAP 6300). The surface analysis for NPs was completed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Thermo Fisher ESCALAB 250Xi). Zeta potential data was collected by a nanoparticle analyzer (Malvern zetasizer Nano ZS). Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) measurements were carried out at ambient temperature in a Bruker EMX EPR spectrometer (Billerica, MA).

Synthesis of Au NPs

Typically, 240 μL of HAuCl 4 ·3H 2 O (25 mM) was diluted with 10 mL of deionized water, followed by heating to 100 o C. Then, 1 mL of trisodium citrate dihydrate (10 mg mL -1 ) was quickly added, which allowed for 10 min of reaction. After cooling down to room temperature, the product was separated by centrifugation and redispersed in deionized water to form a dispersion (0.442 mg mL -1 ).

Synthesis of Au@Pt x NPs

Briefly, 1.0 mL of above Au NP dispersion was diluted with 8 mL of deionized water, followed by addition of the required volume of H 2 PtCl 6 ·6H 2 O aqueous solution (20 mM) and 0.1 M of ascorbic acid (AA, AA/Pt 4+ = 5). The mixture was heated at 80 o C for 30 min with stirring. Finally, the product was separated by centrifugation, washed repeatedly, and redispersed in deionized water to obtain a dispersion.

Enzyme-catalysis test

For the oxidase-mimic-catalysis, the substrate (10 μL, 50 mM) and NP dispersion (30 μL, 0.218 mM) were incubated in acetate buffer (100 mM, same as below) for the required time, followed by measuring absorbance at 652 nm using a multimode plate reader (PerkinElmer EnSpire, same as below). For the peroxidase-mimic-catalysis, above procedure was applied except that H 2 O 2 (10 μL, 250 mM) was additionally introduced.

Investigations of ROS generation

The possible ROS generated during catalysis, including hydroxyl radicals (•OH), superoxide anions (O 2 •− ), and singlet oxygen ( 1 O 2 ), were identified by the oxidations of probe molecules and EPR, using acetate buffer (pH 4) or DMSO as the reaction media. 

EPR measurement

All samples were prepared on the spot, followed by EPR measurement. To test possible •OH radicals, the DMPO solution (10 μL, 500 mM), H 2 O 2 solution (10 μL, 200 mM) and NP dispersion (10 μL, 5 mM) were added into buffer (470 μL), followed by incubation of 10 min.To test possible 1 O 2 , the TEMP solution (10 μL, 2 M) and NP dispersion (10 μL, 5 mM) were added into buffer (480 μL), followed by incubation of 10 min. 8 To test possible O 2 •− radicals, the NP powder (1 mg) was dissolved in DMSO (490 μL). The resulted solution was incubated in air for 10 min, followed by addition of DMPO solution (10 μL, 500 mM).Besides, the possible O 2 production, from catalytic decomposition of H 2 O 2 by Au@Pt 3. 15 NPs, was also studied by EPR. Considering interference of dissolved O 2 , N 2 was introduced to exclude residual O 2 in all reaction solutions before use. Briefly, the deoxygenated CTPO solution (10 μL, 1 mM), H 2 O 2 solution (10 μL, 200 mM) and Au@Pt 3.15 dispersion with different concentrations (10 μL, 0.5 or 5 mM) were co-incubated in buffer (470 μL) for 10 min, followed by EPR measurement.

Electron transfer experiment

The possible electron transfer during catalysis was study by oxidation of reduced cytochrome C. Briefly, under N 2 atmosphere, the reduced cytochrome C (10 μL, 4 mM) and Au@Pt 3.15 dispersion (20 μL, 0.218 mM) were incubated in acetate buffer (970 μL, pH 4) for 2.5 h. Then, the UV-Vis spectrum of reaction mixture was recorded.

Conjugation of the Au@Pt x NPs

The antibodies were conjugated onto the Au@Pt x NPs by adsorption. Take the conjugation of the Au@Pt 3.15 NPs for example, 1.0 mL of Au@Pt 3.15 dispersion (0.853 mg mL -1 ) was mixed with 19 mL of S1 detection antibody with different concentrations (0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 5.0, 7.5 and 10 ng mL -1 ), followed by the co-incubation at 4 o C for 24 h. After washing with PBS buffer (same as below), the antibody-conjugated NPs were used for antigen detection in immunoassay. Above procedure was applied to the incubation of HRP (0.213 mg mL -1 ) conjugated with antibody except for washing by PBS.

Detection of S1 protein of SARS-Cov-2

The detection of S1 protein was performed in 96-well polystyrene plates. Firstly, 100 μL of the capture antibody was loaded into each well and incubated at 4 o C overnight. After washing 5 times, each well was blocked by 1% BSA in PBS buffer, followed by addition of 100 μL of S1 protein with different concentrations, co-incubation at 4 o C for the required time, and washing 5 times. Next, 100 μL of the 9 antibody-conjugated Au@Pt 3.15 NPs (0.218 mM) was added into each well and incubated at room temperature for 2 h, which was further allowed to wash 5 times.Afterwards, 100 μL of solution containing TMB (2 mM) and H 2 O 2 (10 mM) was added into each well to initiate the catalysis at room temperature for 20 min. Finally, 50 μL of H 2 SO 4 solution (2 M) was added to stop the reaction, and the absorbance was recorded at 450 nm.

Synthesis and characterization

The Au NPs were prepared by the liquid-phase reduction of HAuCl 4 ·3H 2 O by trisodium citrate dihydrate in boiling water. The obtained Au NPs has fine uniformity in size with about 13 nm in diameter (Fig. S1 ). With Au NPs as seeds, H 2 PtCl 6 ·6H 2 O as the metal precursor was introduced together with ascorbic acid as the reductant, Expectedly, the diameter of NPs had a tendency to increase as the Pt/Au feed ratio increased (Fig. S2) . The larger feed ratio also resulted in more Pt content in products, from the composition analysis by ICP-OES (Table S1 ). Fig. 2A 4 nm in size) were distributed on the surface of a single NP selected randomly, which were assembled into a porous outer layer. The lattice fringes of a typical particle with interplanar spacing of 0.226 nm (Fig. 2C) , corresponded well to Pt (111) plane. These results suggest that the surface particles were composed of Pt elements. The core-shell structure of NPs was also confirmed by the XRD analysis. (Fig. 2D ) and corresponding elemental maps of metals ( Fig. 2E and 2F) . Besides, the XPS analysis of surface chemical state of metals in the Au@Pt 3.15 NPs also provided useful information. As shown in Fig. 2G , the sample was observed at binding energies (BEs) of 71.8 eV (Pt 4f 7/2 ) and 75.1 eV (Pt 4f 5/2 ) attributed to metallic Pt, while BEs at 72.4 eV (Pt 4f 7/2 ) and 75.9 eV (Pt 4f 5/2 ) corresponded to Pt 2+ species [19] , respectively. Meanwhile, the Au 4f 7/2 and Au 4f 5/2 core level BEs appeared at 84.7 eV and 88.4 eV (Fig. 2H) , respectively in good agreement with bulk Au metallic values [20] . Thus, the obtained NPs was made of Au 0 cores and Pt shells with coexistence of Pt 0 and Pt 2+ . 

Catalytic properties

To investigate enzymatic activity, TMB oxidation was carried out in open air, with the Au@Pt 3.15 NPs as a model catalyst. After addition of NPs, the solution clearly displayed a blue color (Fig. 3A) , with maximum absorption at 652 nm characteristic of oxidized TMB [21] . 

Optimization of reaction parameters

The peroxidase-like activity is of special interest due to numerous applications in biomedical areas. To obtain the best catalytic performance of the Au@Pt x NPs for practical applications, several parameters for TMB oxidation were systematically investigated. As previously revealed, the composition of multimetallic NPs could affect their enzymatic activity [22] . For the Au@Pt x NPs, as the Pt/Au ratio increased, the absorbance increased but gradually decreased when above 3.15 (Fig. 4A) .Meanwhile, pH and temperature played essential roles in the catalysis, in which the optimal absorbance were achieved at pH = 4 (Fig. 4B) and 60 o C (Fig. 4C) , respectively, similar to other Au-based nanozymes [23] . Additionally, the concentration of oxidant, substrate, and catalyst, also affected catalysis. The absorbance continuously increased with H 2 O 2 concentration (c H ) below 10 mM, but it gradually decreased when c H was above 10 mM (Fig. 4D) . For the concentration of TMB (c TMB ), a moderate value of c TMB (2 mM) gave the largest absorbance (Fig. 4E) .Moreover, the absorbance increased as the concentration of catalyst (c cat ) below 1.1 μM; however, by further raising c cat , the absorbance slightly decreased (Fig. 4F) . 

Kinetics study

To elucidate the mechanism, the TMB oxidation by the Au@Pt 3.15 NPs was conducted by the steady-state kinetic experiments, on a basis of similar procedure reported by our group [24] . By respectively changing the c H and c TMB in the reaction system, the kinetic data as a function of time were carefully gathered. Table   S2 , the K m values for Au@Pt 3.15 NPs were comparable to those for HRP and other NPs like Fe 3 O 4 [25] and Pt NPs [26] , indicating good affinity of the Au@Pt 3.15 NPs.Despite similar affinity of the Au NPs towards substrates, however, they delivered far lower v max values. The formed porous shells by introducing Pt atoms could provide abundant reaction sites and tunnels, which could be beneficial for adsorption and activation of reactants, thus leading to enhanced catalysis of the Au@Pt 3.15 NPs. 

Catalytic mechanism

The peroxidase-mimic catalysis involving metallic NPs often undergoes two types of pathways: the ROS production [27] and the ET process [28] . For the former, the metals could catalyze decomposition of O-O bonds in H 2 O 2 molecules, generating •OH radicals as important active oxygen intermediates. Contrarily, for the latter, the metals could not trigger ROS generation during catalysis, but mediate ET from the enzyme substrate to the catalyst.To probe possible •OH radicals yielded by Au@Pt 3.15 NPs, several typical probes (rhodamine B [29] , isopropanol [30] and terephthalic acid [31] ) were employed, since they can react with •OH radicals. However, in both of potential oxidations of rhodamine B (Rh B) and isopropanol, the absorbance of solutions remained 15 substantially unchanged after co-incubation of probes, H 2 O 2 , and NPs ( Fig. 6A and   6B ), implying that •OH radicals could not be generated in the system. Similar result was obtained from another probe reaction by oxidation of terephthalic acid (TA).From the blue curve shown in Fig. 6C , when the NPs were absent, the fluorescence (FL) spectrum of the solution displayed an obvious peak located at about 440 nm, corresponding to 2-hydroxyterephthalic acid as the oxidized product of TA [32] .Moreover, the FL intensity of the solution could be increased by prolonging reaction time or raising concentration of H 2 O 2 (Fig. S5) . These results indicate TA molecules were partially oxidized by •OH radicals, deriving from self-decomposition of instable H 2 O 2 . However, the FL intensity of the solution at the same wavelength significantly decreased after addition of NPs (red curve, Fig. 6C ). To investigate whether the decrease in FL intensity was related to catalytic decomposition of H 2 O 2 by the Au@Pt 3.15 NPs, the EPR experiments were performed, with CTPO as spin trap for oxygen. As shown in Fig. S6A , compared to the control experiment, the super hyperfine structure in the EPR spectra became weak in the presence of 0.5 mM of Au@Pt 3.15 NPs, which further became smooth when the concentration of Au@Pt 3.15 NPs was increased to 5 mM, indicating production of more O 2 gas. Thus, the At the same time, the possible ET process was investigated by oxidation of reduced cytochrome C (red-CytC), an active electron acceptor bears characteristic absorption peaks at 520 and 550 nm [33] . After co-incubation of red-CytC and NPs, these peaks disappeared while a new peak appeared at 530 nm assigned to the oxidized CytC (Fig.   6D ), indicating electron transfer from the substrate to the catalyst. Meanwhile, the electronic structure of the Au@Pt 3.15 NPs was studied by XPS. Compared to the Au 4f 7/2 core level BE (84.3 eV) in the Au NPs (Fig. S8) , the Au@Pt 3.15 NPs exhibited a positive Au 4f 7/2 core level BE shift (0.4 eV), suggesting the electronic structure of Au atoms was modified by Pt atoms. The increase of BE in the Au@Pt 3.15 NPs indicates that electrons transferred from Au atoms to Pt atoms, leading to formation of electron-deficient Au cores but electron-rich Pt shells, and thus favorable for adsorption and activation of TMB molecules. The Au cores provided electrons for the Pt atoms on the shells, which brought a substantial change in the catalytic pathway of the Au NPs, that is, from intrinsic ROS generation to fast ET, ultimately facilitating catalysis of the Au@Pt 3.15 NPs.

Colorimetric detection of S1 protein of SARS-CoV-2

The highly efficient peroxidase-catalysis of the Au@Pt 3.15 NPs could be potentially beneficial to construct sensitive biosensors for S1 protein of SARS-CoV-2. Taking advantage of porous Pt shells, the NPs could be conveniently functionalized with the polyclonal antibodies through simple adsorption, which was verified by the measurement of Zeta potential in water (Fig. S9) . However, the coating of antibodies might block active sites of the NPs, causing a decrease in the enzyme-like activity.Experimentally, in the range of antibody concentration (c ab ) from 0.25 to 0.5 ng mL -1 , about one half of absorbance relative to the largest value remained; as c ab further increased, the absorbance greatly decreased (Fig. S10) . To guarantee specificity for detection, the NPs were modified using a value of c ab of 0.5 ng mL -1 . Meanwhile, the incubation of S1 protein within 2 hours was adequate for the detection (Fig. S11) .The colorimetric reaction was completed within 20 min. As the concentration of S1 protein (c S1 ) increased (from 10 ng mL -1 to 800 ng mL -1 ), the absorbance of reaction solutions gradually increased, and was linearly proportional to c S1 in the range of 10-100 ng mL -1 (Fig. 7A) . As the parallel test, the assay based on the HRP was also made (Fig. 7B) . To estimate the LOD, the absorbance of a series of blank samples (n = 12) without protein were carefully determined (Fig. S12) . The limit of detection was then calculated from the equation: LOD = 3σ/S, where σ represents the standard deviation of blank samples and S refers to the slope of the calibration curve. As listed in Table S3 , present ELISA kit gave a LOD with a value of 11 ng mL -1 , lower than the HRP conjugated one (19 ng mL -1 ), HRP conjugated monoclonal antibodies (37 ng mL -1 for F26G18 or 19 ng mL -1 for F157) [34] , and other methods such as electrochemical (14 ng mL -1 ) [35] . Therefore, present assay showed high sensitivity. The selectivity of our method was further examined. From Fig. 8 , the solution containing S1 protein presented the largest absorbance, showing a brown color easily observed by naked eyes. However, in the control experiments involving other proteins (e. g., nuclear protein, glucose oxidase, collagen, BSA, α-amylase, and lysozyme), none of them gave significant absorbance, with light yellow color of solutions. Thus, the established assay demonstrated good selectivity towards S1 protein. 

Conclusion

In summary, the Au@Pt 3.15 NPs were successfully utilized to construct a novel colorimetric biosensor for S1 protein of SARS-CoV-2 based on their excellent peroxidase-like activity, with merits of simplicity, high sensitivity and selectivity.Notably, the porous nanostructure and electron-rich Pt shells of the Au@Pt 3.15 NPs significantly enhanced their peroxidase-catalysis, during which fast electron transfer was believed to be an important catalytic pathway, different from that of the Au NPs-catalyzed ROS generation. Our observations will be helpful to the mechanism understanding of nanozyme catalysis and development of colorimetric biosensors based on metallic NPs for practical diagnosis.

