Abstract

In medical imaging procedures for the detection of coronavirus, apart from medical tests, approval of diagnosis has special significance. Imaging procedures are also useful for detecting the damage caused by COVID-19. Chest X-ray imaging is frequently used to diagnose COVID-19 and different pneumonias. This paper presents a task-specific framework to detect coronavirus in X-ray images. Binary classification of three different labels (healthy, bacterial pneumonia, and COVID-19) was performed on two differentiated data sets in which corona is stated as positive. First-order statistics, gray level co-occurrence matrix, gray level run length matrix, and gray level size zone matrix were analyzed to form fifteen sub-data sets and to ascertain the necessary radiomics. Two normalization methods are compared to make the data meaningful. Furthermore, five feature ranking approaches (Bhattacharyya, entropy, Roc, t-test, and Wilcoxon) are mentioned to provide necessary information to a state-of-the-art classifier based on Gauss-map-based chaotic particle swarm optimization and neural networks. The proposed framework was designed according to the analyses about radiomics, normalization approaches, and filter-based feature ranking methods. In experiments, seven metrics were evaluated to objectively determine the results: accuracy, area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, sensitivity, specificity, g-mean, precision, and f-measure. The proposed framework showed promising scores on two X-ray-based data sets, especially with the accuracy and area under the ROC curve rates exceeding 99% for the classification of coronavirus vs. others. .tr (M. Barstuğan).Ozturk et al. [6] proposed a COVID-19 detection model based on chest X-ray images, and they performed binary (COVID-19 and nofinding) and multiclass (COVID-19 and no-finding and pneumonia) classifications on two challenging data sets. The first data set included 125 COVID-19 and 500 no-finding images, while the second one involved 125 COVID-19, 500 no-finding, and 500 pneumonia cases. Both data sets were discriminated by DarkCovidNet, which yielded classification accuracies of 98.08% and 87.02% for binary and multiclass classifications, respectively. Toğaçar et al.[7] used a support vector machine (SVM)-based model to classify an X-ray data set including 295 coronavirus, 65 normal, and 98 pneumonia cases. A preprocessing step in which the data classes were restructured using a fuzzy color algorithm was used for the images. The restructured images were then stacked with the original images, and deep learning models were considered to extract features from the data set. Efficient features were https://doi.

