Abstract

We assessed people's knowledge, attitudes, and perceptions regarding bat ecology, myths associated with bats, and their involvement in the transmission of Nipah virus (NiV). We found that community people in Bangladesh had inadequate knowledge of bat ecology and myths surrounding NiV. People's demographic characteristics, such as sex, age, occupation, level of education, and exposure to a Nipah outbreak, were determined to be key factors influencing their knowledge, attitudes, and perceptions of bat ecology, myths, and their transmission of NiV. Educational interventions are recommended for targeted groups in the community to raise awareness and to improve people's current knowledge of the role of bats in ecosystem services and their risky behavioral practices driving NiV transmission in Bangladesh.Bats are known reservoirs of Nipah virus (NiV) and some filoviruses and also appear likely to harbor the evolutionary progenitors of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV), severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV). While bats are considered a reservoir of deadly viruses, little is known about people's knowledge, attitudes, and perceptions of bat conservation and ecology. The current study aimed to assess community people's knowledge, attitudes, and perceptions of bat ecology, myths, and the role of bats in transmitting NiV in Bangladesh. Since 2001, NiV has been a continuous threat to public health with a mortality rate of approximately 70% in Bangladesh. Over the years, many public health interventions have been implemented to raise awareness about bats and the spreading of NiV among the community peoples of Nipah outbreak areas (NOAs) and Nipah non-outbreak areas (NNOAs). We hypothesized that people from both areas might have similar knowledge of bat ecology and myths about bats but different knowledge regarding their role in the spreading of NiV. Using a four-point Likert scale-based questionnaire, our analysis showed that most people lack adequate knowledge regarding the role of bats in maintaining the ecological balance and instead trust their beliefs in different myths about bats. Factor score analysis showed that respondents' gender (p = 0.01), the outbreak status of the area (p = 0.03), and their occupation (p = 0.04) were significant factors influencing their knowledge of bat ecology and myths. A regression Animals 2020, 10, 1814 2 of 17 analysis showed that farmers had 0.34 times the odds of having correct or positive knowledge of bat ecology and myths than businesspersons (odds ratio (OR) = 0.34, 95% confidence interval (95% CI) = 0.15-0.78, p = 0.01). Regarding the spreading of NiV via bats, people had a lower level of knowledge. In NOAs, age (p = 0.00), occupation (p = 0.00), and level of education (p = 0.00) were found to be factors contributing to the amount of knowledge regarding the transmission of NiV, whereas in NNOAs, the contributing factors were occupation (p = 0.00) and level of education (p = 0.01). Regression analysis revealed that respondents who were engaged in services (OR = 3.02, 95% CI = 1.07-8.54, p = 0.04) and who had completed primary education (OR = 3.06, 95% CI = 1.02-9.17, p < 0.05) were likely to have correct knowledge regarding the spreading of NiV. Based on the study results, we recommend educational interventions for targeted groups in the community, highlighting the ecosystem services and conservation of bats so as to improve people's current knowledge and subsequent behavior regarding the role of bats in ecology and the spreading of NiV in Bangladesh.

