Abstract

Leaf growth and photosynthetic characteristics of sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas var. Biru Putih) grown under different light quantities were studied in a tropical greenhouse. The stem cuttings of I. batatas with adventitious roots were grown hydroponically under (1) only natural sunlight (SL); (2) SL with supplemental LED at a PPFD of 150 µmol m -2 s -1 (SL + L-LED); and(3) SL with supplemental LED at a PPFD of 300 µmol m -2 s -1 (SL + H-LED). One week after emergence, all leaves had similar area and water content. However, leaf fresh weight and dry J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f 2 weight were significantly higher in plants grown under SL + L-LED and SL + H-LED than under SL due to their thicker leaves reflected by the lower specific leaf area. Plants grown under SL had significantly lower concentrations of total chlorophyll (Chl) and total carotenoids (Car) but higher Chl a/b ratio than under SL + L-LED and SL + H-LED. However, all plants had similar Chl/Car ratios. Although midday Fv/Fm ratio was the lowest in leaves grown under SL+ H-LED followed by SL+ L-LED and SL, predawn Fv/Fm ratios of all leaves were higher than 0.8. Increasing growth irradiance with supplemental LED resulted in higher electron transport rate and photochemical quenching but lower non-photochemical quenching compared to those of plants grown under SL. Measured under their respective growth irradiance in the greenhouse, attached leaves grown under SL + L-LED and SL+H-LED had significantly higher photosynthetic CO2 assimilation rate and stomatal conductance than under SL. However, measuring the detached leaves at 25 o C in the laboratory, there were no significant differences in PS II and Cyt b6f concentrations although lightand CO2-statured photosynthetic O2 evolution rates were slightly higher in leaves grown under SL+ H-LED than under SL. Impacts of supplemental LED on leaf growth and photosynthetic characteristics were discussed. bisphosphate; Rubisco, ribulose 1.5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase; SL, natural sunlight; SL+ L-LED, natural sunlight with supplemental LED lighting at a PPFD of 150 µmol m -2 s -1 ; SL J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f + H-LED, natural sunlight with supplemental LED lighting at a PPFD of 300 µmol m -2 s -1 ; SLA, specific leaf area; Tr, Transpiration

