Abstract

The conjugation of small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) proteins to substrates is a well-described post-translational modification that regulates protein activity, subcellular localization, and protein-protein interactions for a variety of downstream cellular activities. Several studies describe SUMOylation as an essential post-translational modification for successful viral infection across a broad range of viruses, including RNA and DNA viruses, both enveloped and un-enveloped. These viruses include but are not limited to herpes viruses, human immunodeficiency virus-1, and coronaviruses. In addition to the SUMOylation of viral proteins during infection, evidence shows that viruses manipulate the SUMO pathway for host protein SUMOylation. SUMOylation of host and viral proteins greatly impacts host innate immunity through viral manipulation of the host SUMOylation machinery to promote viral replication and pathogenesis. Other post-translational modifications like phosphorylation can also modulate SUMO function. For example, phosphorylation of COUP-TF interacting protein 2 (CTIP2) leads to its SUMOylation and subsequent proteasomal degradation. The SUMOylation of CTIP2 and subsequent degradation prevents CTIP2-mediated recruitment of a multi-enzymatic complex to the HIV-1 promoter that usually prevents the transcription of integrated viral DNA. Thus, the "SUMO switch" could have implications for CTIP2-mediated transcriptional repression of HIV-1 in latency and viral persistence. In this review, we describe the consequences of SUMO in innate immunity and then focus on the various ways that viral pathogens have evolved to hijack the conserved SUMO machinery. Increased understanding of the many roles of SUMOylation in viral infections can lead to novel insight into the regulation of viral pathogenesis with the potential to uncover new targets for antiviral therapies.Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

