Abstract

Quantitative proteomics data were obtained from two CHO cell lines (CHO-S and CHO DG44) and compared with seven Chinese hamster (Cricetulus griseus) tissues (brain, heart, kidney, liver, lung, ovary and spleen) by tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling followed by mass spectrometry, providing a comprehensive hamster tissue and cell line proteomics atlas. Of the 8470 unique proteins identified, high similarity was observed between CHO-S and CHO DG44 and included increases in proteins involved in DNA replication, cell cycle, RNA processing, and chromosome processing. Alternatively, gene ontology and pathway analysis in tissues indicated increased protein intensities related to important tissue functionalities. Proteins enriched in the brain included those involved in acidic amino acid metabolism, Golgi apparatus, and ion and phospholipid transport. The lung showed enrichment in proteins involved in BCAA catabolism, ROS metabolism, vesicle trafficking, and lipid synthesis while the ovary exhibited enrichments in extracellular matrix and adhesion proteins. The heart proteome included vasoconstriction, complement activation, and lipoprotein metabolism enrichments. These detailed comparisons of CHO cell lines and hamster tissues will enhance understanding of the relationship between proteins and tissue function and pinpoint potential pathways of biotechnological relevance for future cell engineering.The history of CHO cell line establishment from Cricetulus griseus dates back to the 1950s when Theodore T. Puck and colleagues established the CHO-K1 cell line 1 . Today, CHO cell lines generated from the Chinese hamster dominate the biopharmaceutical industry and their products generate billions of dollars in revenue annually 2,3 . The success of CHO cell lines for recombinant protein production can be attributed to their high growth rate, ease of genetic modification, and ability to post-translationally modify proteins via glycosylation, including galactosylation and sialylation. The original CHO cell line was adapted and modified by various researchers to create cell lines, such as CHO-DXB11, CHO DG44, and CHO-S 4,5 . Thus, there may be genetic differences across CHO parental cell lines, as well as clonal-and process-dependent variations 2 . These clonal variabilities may potentially lead to differences across transcriptomes and proteomes. Since each and every CHO cell line exhibits significant genomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic signatures, a single CHO-ome is not necessarily directly applicable across different laboratories. In addition to cell line differences, variations in the bioprocess conditions, including media formulations and bioreactor operations, can alter the transcriptome and proteome.Initial efforts to understand CHO include the sequencing of both the CHO and Cricetulus griseus genomes. The draft CHO-K1 genome was established in 2011 6 , and the Chinese hamster genome followed two years later 7 . In addition, the CHO-DXB11 genome was sequenced to understand the DHFR negative phenotype and open 1 www.nature.com/scientificreports/ cell line drift 8 . Other efforts have focused on creating bacterial artificial chromosome libraries for CHO-K1 and CHO-DG44 cell lines in order to visualize hamster chromosome re-arrangements 9 . The recent PICR Chinese hamster genome has utilized real time sequencing with Illumina-based assemblies to generate a more complete CHO genome 10 .Similar efforts have been used to understand mRNA and protein expression in CHO using transcriptomics and proteomics, respectively. Through advancements in sample preparation and mass spectrometry (MS) technology, it is possible to identify and quantify thousands of cellular proteins. Initial CHO proteomic analyses revealed enrichment in protein processing and apoptosis pathways at the proteomic level in the CHO-K1 cell line compared to the human, mouse, and CHO genome and transcriptome 11 . More recent studies in our lab and others have revealed extensive CHO proteomics databases as well as databases for the secretome and CHO cell lines in exponential and stationary phases 12,13 . In addition, different bioprocess conditions have been studied via transcriptomics and proteomics to yield insights into protein production, cell growth, cell death, favorable glycosylation, and optimized media formulations 14,15 .Proteomics has been used to study the proteome of specific organs in order to elucidate how protein expression changes across different tissues in the hamster, as previously studied for human 16 and mouse 17 . Hamsters represent another important small animal model in biomedicine for studying diseases and evaluating the effect of potential therapies in pharmaceutical sciences. Indeed, Chinese hamsters have been applied as a small animal model for diabetes, cancer, and the impact of radiation 18-21 . More recently, hamster species represent one of the prime small animal models for examining the impact of SARS-CoV-2 infections and potential therapies 22 . Understanding the proteomics profiles across different tissues will help biomedical scientists to understand how expressed proteins are responsible for tissue-specific functionalities. From a disease perspective, tissue proteomics can enable scientists to appreciate why different diseases and drugs affect various tissues differently. From a biotechnology perspective, specific functionalities present in different tissues can provide insights into ways to improve the capabilities of CHO cell line production hosts by adding capabilities present in certain tissues that may be distinct from current hosts.Therefore, in this study, we employed comparative proteomics using tandem mass tag labeling (TMT) in order to compare two representative CHO cell lines and seven different tissues from Chinese hamster. The CHO-S and CHO DG44 cell lines were used as model cell lines for comparison to hamster tissue expression patterns. Multiple organs (brain, heart, kidney, liver, lung, ovary and spleen) relevant to pharmaceutical sciences, disease, and biotechnology were used to generate tissue-specific proteomes, providing the most comprehensive and diverse tissue proteome available for hamsters to date. Tissue-tissue and tissue-cell line comparisons suggest functions and pathways with significant differential expression across different cell types, with cell lines tending to upregulate proteins associated with growth and gene expression, while tissue samples exhibit upregulation in tissuespecific functional pathways. Examining proteins in CHO cell lines and tissues will enhance our understanding of why tissue exhibit certain characteristics, how cell lines are adapted for cell culture and protein production, and highlight how CHO cells could potentially be modified to include useful tissue-specific functions in future cell engineering efforts.Tissue isolation. Tissues from various organs (brain, heart, kidney, liver, lung, ovary and spleen) were harvested from female Chinese hamsters (age 5-10 weeks) generously provided by the lab of Dr. ). Euthanization was performed by CO 2 and verified by abdominal puncture, in accordance with all guidelines and regulations of the Johns Hopkins University Animal Care and Use Committee (Approved Protocol HA14A84). Upon harvest, each organ was divided into small pieces, rapidly frozen on dry ice, and subsequently stored at − 80 °C until further analysis.Cell culture. Two commercial suspension CHO cell lines, CHO-S and CHO DG44, were grown in batch culture and the samples were collected and stored. CHO-S cells were cultured in CD-CHO medium supplemented with 8 mM glutamine (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), and CHO DG44 cells were cultured in DG44 medium supplemented with 2 mM glutamine (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Both cell lines were incubated at 37 °C with 8% CO 2 shaking at 120RPM; viable cell density and viability were determined by hemocytometer and trypan blue staining. For sample collection, approximately 3 × 10 6 cells were centrifuged, washed with PBS on ice, frozen rapidly on dry ice and stored at −80 °C until analysis. Based on the growth profiles for both cell lines (data not shown), samples collected on day 2 were identified as corresponding to midexponential phase and used for further analyses.

