Abstract

Introduction: Bariatric surgery is safe and efficient surgical method for weight loss, but it is not free from complications. We aim to evaluate the prevalence of depression after Sleeve Gastrectomy (SG) in a narrow period of time on Iranian ethnicity.Methods: 307 cases that underwent SG in Erfan Niayesh hospital were included. The questionnaire was based on International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision (ICD-9) codes to define diagnoses. Screening follow-up period was 20 to 24 months.The level of statistical significance was set at p < .05.Of 307 subjects, preoperative depression was 30.2% and post-operative depression was 37.7% (p = .025). Besides, BMI, dyslipidaemia, good feelings about body size and weight loss were statistically significant at p < .05.There was an increased risk of depression following the procedure mainly in divorced cases.The prevalence of clinical depression after sleeve gastrectomy was statistically significant and dependent on other variables. We provided guidance for people considering SG and their clinicians in terms of evaluating potential risks and benefits of surgery.depression, obesity, sleeve gastrectomy results illustrate a significant weight loss from 42.4 kg/m 2 before surgery to 29.3 kg/m 2 after surgery (<.00001). As it has been mentioned, from 307 subjects, there were 116 subjects (37.7%) suffering from depression after surgery in this report. Albeit, the number of individuals undergoing gastric bypass or other types of bariatric surgery was high, and they were excluded from the study due to maintaining the heterogeneity of the population. In our retrospective analysis, the age factor, marital status, pre-and postoperative BMI, anti-depressant drugs prescription, good feelings about body size and weight and their impact on clinical depression were investigated in people who underwent SG procedure. The results were coincided with previously published studies on other methods. 30,31 However, most of the studies did not focus on depression and it was one of various psychological complications; in addition, they had a limited statistical population and follow-up period.However, due to the very low complication occurrence of SG and its numerous health benefits, patients and surgeons should focus more on complication prevention in vulnerable groups.The strengths of our study were the higher number of patients of all ages, independent data collection, focus on specific type of bariatric surgery (SG), a defined surgeon, specific surgical team with the same surgical equipments for all patients, in an invariant hospital without interruption during the survey. As far as the weaknesses of this survey is concern, more than 60 months of follow-up period, considering various aspects of psychological problems such as anxiety, eating disorders and memory loss can be taken into account in further studies.This survey examined the prevalence of depression after SG in subjects with or without a prior history of depression. BMI, dyslipidaemia, good feelings about body size and weight and clinical depression changes were statistically significant at p < .05.There was an increased risk of depression following the procedure mainly in divorced cases. For patients considering bariatric surgery and their physicians, this research provides a clearer estimate of post-surgical depression risk and associated exacerbating and mitigating factors. Other psychological impairments were not evaluated in this study.

