Abstract

The use of abrasive waterjets (AWJ) to machine metal surfaces is prevalent through-out industry. AWJ requires the purchase and disposal of costly abrasive particles which increases manufacturing costs and environmental-footprint. This motivates the exploration for low-cost, ecofriendly alternatives. A novel method which utilizes a stream of high-speed water droplets (WD) travelling through a sub-atmospheric pressure environment to remove material without using abrasive grit is presented. In this paper, the efficacy of this new process is investigated and compared to AWJ and pure water jet (WJ) (i.e., without abrasive particles) by measuring the material removal rates (MRR) of each process on a hard-to-machine steel, DP 1180, for equivalent water-flow conditions. Trench profiles are created by traversing each of the jets across a metal sample, from which the MRR and trench profiles are obtained. The MRR results reveal that WD is significantly faster than WJ, but is subordinate compared to AWJ for MRR efficiency. This identifies a trade-off between manufacturing cost and time.The use of abrasive waterjets (AWJ) to machine metal surfaces is prevalent through-out industry. AWJ requires the purchase and disposal of costly abrasive particles which increases manufacturing costs and environmental-footprint. This motivates the exploration for low-cost, ecofriendly alternatives. A novel method which utilizes a stream of high-speed water droplets (WD) travelling through a sub-atmospheric pressure environment to remove material without using abrasive grit is presented. In this paper, the efficacy of this new process is investigated and compared to AWJ and pure water jet (WJ) (i.e., without abrasive particles) by measuring the material removal rates (MRR) of each process on a hard-to-machine steel, DP 1180, for equivalent water-flow conditions. Trench profiles are created by traversing each of the jets across a metal sample, from which the MRR and trench profiles are obtained. The MRR results reveal that WD is significantly faster than WJ, but is subordinate compared to AWJ for MRR efficiency. This identifies a trade-off between manufacturing cost and time.The use of abrasive waterjets (AWJ) to machine metal surfaces is prevalent through-out industry. AWJ requires the purchase and disposal of costly abrasive particles which increases manufacturing costs and environmental-footprint. This motivates the exploration for low-cost, ecofriendly alternatives. A novel method which utilizes a stream of high-speed water droplets (WD) travelling through a sub-atmospheric pressure environment to remove material without using abrasive grit is presented. In this paper, the efficacy of this new process is investigated and compared to AWJ and pure water jet (WJ) (i.e., without abrasive particles) by measuring the material removal rates (MRR) of each process on a hard-to-machine steel, DP 1180, for equivalent water-flow conditions. Trench profiles are created by traversing each of the jets across a metal sample, from which the MRR and trench profiles are obtained. The MRR results reveal that WD is significantly faster than WJ, but is subordinate compared to AWJ for MRR efficiency. This identifies a trade-off between manufacturing cost and time.

