Abstract

Background: Capnocytophaga canimorsus (C. canimorsus) infections are rare and usually present with unspecific symptoms, which can eventually end in fatal septic shock and multiorgan failure. The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) related coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), on the other hand, is predominantly characterized by acute respiratory failure, although other organ complications can occur. Both infectious diseases have in common that hyperinflammation with a cytokine storm can occur. While microbial detection of C. canimorsus in blood cultures can take over 48 h, diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 is facilitated by a widely available rapid antigen diagnostic test (Ag-RDT) the results of which are available within half an hour. These Ag-RDT results are commonly verified by a nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT), whose results are only available after a further 24 h. Case presentation: A 68-year-old male patient with the diagnosis of COVID-19 pneumonia was referred to our Intensive Care Unit (ICU) from another hospital after testing positive on an Ag-RDT. While the initial therapy was focused on COVID-19, the patient developed a fulminant septic shock within a few hours after admission to the ICU, unresponsive to maximum treatment. SARS-CoV-2 NAATs were negative, but bacteremia of C. canimorsus was diagnosed post-mortem. Further anamnestic information suggest that a small skin injury caused by a dog leash or the subsequent contact of this injury with the patient's dog could be the possible point of entry for these bacteria. Conclusion: During the acute phase of hyperinflammation and cytokine storm, laboratory results can resemble both, sepsis of bacterial origin or SARS-CoV-2. This means that even in the light of a global SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, where this diagnosis provides the most salient train of thoughts, differential diagnoses must be considered. Ag-RDT can contribute to early detection of a SARS-CoV-2 infection, but false-positive results may cause fixation errors with severe consequences for patient outcome.

