Abstract

Objectives: Patients' experiences are important part of health services quality research, but it's still unclear whether patients' experiences are influenced by resident status. The objective of study was to evaluate the association between resident status and patients' primary care experiences with the focus on migrants and residents.A cross-sectional study using multi-stage cluster random sampling was conducted from September to November 2019. Generalized linear models were used to evaluate the association between resident status and primary care experiences.Setting: Six community health centers in Guangzhou, China.Participants: 1568 patients aged 20 years or older.Patients' primary care experiences were assessed using the Primary Care Assessment Tool (PCAT). Ten domains are included in PCAT. The domains refer to first contact-utilization, first contact-access, ongoing care, coordination (referral), coordination (information), comprehensiveness (available), comprehensiveness (available), familycenteredness, community orientation, and cultural competence from patient's perceptions.Results: 1586 questionnaires were analyzed. After adjusting for age, sex, education, annual family income, self-perceived health status, chronic condition, annual medical expenditure and medical insurance, the PCAT total scores of the migrants were significantly lower than those of residents (β= -0.128; 95% CI, -0.218 to -0.037). Migrants had significantly lower scores than residents in First contact-utilization (β=-0.245; 95% CI, -0.341 to -0.148), Ongoing care (β=-0.175; 95% CI, -0.292 to -0.059), Family-centeredness (β=-0.112; 95% CI; -0.225 to .001), Community orientation (β=-0.176; 95% CI, -0.286 to -0.066) and Cultural competence (β=-0.270; 95% CI, -0.383 to -0.156), respectively.Primary care experiences of migrants were significantly worse off than those of residents, especially in terms of utilization, continuity and cultural competence. Given the wide disparity in experiences, Chinese healthcare system reform should focus on improving quality of primary care services for migrants, overcoming language barriers and creating patientcentered primary care services. This study adopted an internationally established scale, PCAT, which has been recognized and adopted by many countries. The assessment and research of primary care experiences plays an important role in improving primary care services because it helps family doctors and CHCs better understand patients' primary health experiences and needs and then to improve primary care services. The potential confounding factors influencing the association of resident status and patients' primary care experiences may not have been all captured, such as the variables related to actual health status, working site, health insurance and chronic illness so on.Family-centeredness, J. Community orientation, and K. Cultural competence. Each domain contains 3-5 entries. And, each entry was represented by a 4-point Likert scale (1 = never; 2 = sometimes; 3 = often; 4 = always). The Don't know/Not sure response and missing data were assigned a neutral value of 2.5. The score of each domain was the average of the values for all the entries under that domain. The higher the score, the better the experiences were. The total score of PCAT was derived by averaging the values for all domains. 35We collected individual information including socio-demographic and health-related characteristics with a self-made questionnaire. Socio-demographic information consisted of age (years), sex (male vs. female), annual average household income ( ￥ ), resident status (residents vs. migrants) and education level (Uneducated, Primary school, Middle school, High school, College or above). Health-related characteristics included self-perceived health status (good, average or bad), chronic condition (yes vs. no), diabetes condition (yes vs. no), hypertension condition (yes vs. no), type of health insurance (Urban and Rural Residents, Employee Resident, Business insurance and so on) and annual medical expenditure (￥).The quantitative variables were expressed as means ± standard deviations and median (interquartile range), and the categorical variables as absolute numbers and percentages. A linear model was used to evaluated the association between resident status and patients' primary care experiences. No covariate was included in the crude models. Potential confounders were introduced as covariates in the adjusted models：age, sex, education, annual household income, self-perceived health status, chronic condition, annual medical expenditure, and medical insurance. 21 23 35-40 Two-side P<0.05 was considered significant. All statistical analyses were performed using IBM SPSS25.0.Patients or the public were not involved in the design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination plans of our research.Results1776 PCAT questionnaires were sent out and 1744 were collected, with a response rate of 98.2%. Incomplete, illogical, and repeated questionnaires were considered invalid. After data cleaning, 1568 questionnaires were valid with an effective rate of 89.9%. As shown in table 1, most (62.8%) of patients were more than 60 years old and 55.8% were female. 11.9% of patients were migrants and 88.1% were residents. Compared with residents, migrants aged over 60 were fewer (65.4% vs 43.5%) and migrants with annual household income below 100000 RMB (30.6% vs 23.4%) were fewer. More migrants reported their health status as good (37.3% vs 51.1%).

