Abstract

Two-dimensional (2D) layered materials as a new class of nanomaterial are characterized by a list of exotic properties. These layered materials are investigated widely in several biomedical applications. A comprehensive understanding of the state-of-the-art developments of 2D materials designed for multiple nanoplatforms will aid researchers in various fields to broaden the scope of biomedical applications. Here, we review the advances in 2D material-based biomedical applications. First, we introduce the classification and properties of 2D materials. Next, we summarize surface and structural engineering methods of 2D materials where we discuss surface functionalization, defect, and strain engineering, and creating heterostructures based on layered materials for biomedical applications. After that, we discuss different biomedical applications. Then, we briefly introduced the emerging role of machine learning (ML) as a technological advancement to boost biomedical platforms. Finally, the current challenges, opportunities, and prospects on 2D materials in biomedical applications are discussed.compares Crystal structures, bulk band gap, dielectric constant, and carrier mobility of different 2D materials.The practical application of 2D materials in biomedical applications is also enabled by the advances in producing largearea high-quality 2D materials. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and metal-organic CVD (MOCVD) are prevalent methods to synthesize wafer-scale 2D materials beyond graphene [50, 51] . Efforts have been made toward ensuring the uniform orientation and increasing the size of the domains, of which mechanism is guided by thermodynamics and kinetics [52] . In contrast, molecular beam epitaxy utilizes high-purity elemental sources and ultrahigh vacuum. The in situ characterizations in MBE offer better control of the number of layers compared with CVD [53]. It is also worth noting that 2D monolayers with a size up to millimeters have been realized by mechanical exfoliation using adhesive layers that show better chemical affinity with the 2D materials [54] [55] [56] . Figure 3: Illustration of structural-engineering approaches. (a) Schematic illustration of defect state in WSe 2 monolayer. Adapted with permission from Reference [83]

