Abstract

Effective masking policies to prevent the spread of airborne infections depend on public access to masks with high filtration efficacy. However, poor face-fit is almost universally present in pleated multilayer disposable face masks, severely limiting both individual and community respiratory protection. We developed a set of simple mask modifications to mass-manufactured disposable masks, the most common type of mask used by the public, that dramatically improves both their personalized fit and performance in a low-cost and scalable manner. These modifications comprise a user-moldable full mask periphery wire, integrated earloop tension adjusters, and an inner flange to trap respiratory droplets. We demonstrate that these simple design changes improves quantitative fit factor by 320%, triples the level of protection against aerosolized droplets, and approaches the model efficacy . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 6, 2021. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.07.01.21259428 doi: medRxiv preprint NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.2 of N95 respirators in preventing the community spread of COVID-19, for an estimated additional cost of less than 5 cents per mask with automated production.A personalizable, low-cost mask improves facial fit, reduces user exposure, and decreases spread of contagious aerosols.The COVID-19 pandemic caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) remains an unprecedented threat to global public health. SARS-CoV-2 is known to spread via respiratory droplets and aerosols asymptomatically and pre-symptomatically (1). In the absence of cure or vaccination, numerous nonpharmaceutical public health interventions such as travel restrictions, mass screening, quarantine centers, and contact tracing have been implemented to control the pandemic (2). Even after successful vaccination, masks can be protective while resistance develops, prevent potential asymptomatic spread, and provide protection for immunocompromised individuals and in communities where vaccination has been limited. (3) As a low-risk, precautionary control method (4), universal face masking has shown effectiveness in reducing disease spread (5). However, the performance of most cloth and disposable 3-ply, 3-pleat disposable masks (3PM) is degraded by poor face fit, resulting in leakage of aerosols at gaps between the mask and a wearer's face. This leakage reduces the quantifiable 'fit factor', a metric of mask fit performance. Conventional 3PM have fit factors (FFs) of only 2.6 -4.4 (6, 7), equivalent to ca. 20 -40% leakage. A further limitation of conventional disposable masks occurs during coughing and sneezing, which elevate the mask, enlarging peripheral gaps. To this effect, disposable masks work least well when source control is the most required.Respirators, such as the surgical N95 respirators, fit tightly and provide sufficient protection from fluid and airborne pathogens but were designed for short-term use in high risk environments, not in community settings.The N95 respirators are of shortage, require fit testing, and are uncomfortable to wear for extended periods, which leads to poor adherence, frequent mask removal, and even personal injury (8, 9, 10) . Barrier face coverings offer less protection but are better tolerated by users due to comfort and ease of use (11). Due to large variability in the performance of commercially available consumer masks, the American Society for Testing Materials (ASTM) and National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) released new standards from masks designed provide community and workplace protection against the spread of airborne contagion (12,13). A central feature of these new standards is their requirements for fit, breathability, and filtration.Poor mask fit is due to 1) mismatch between mask and face shape, and 2) looseness of the mask, usually due to inability to adjust mask tightness. A variety of secondary devices (e.g. mask fitters, extender straps) andtechniques (e.g. knotting, tucking, double masking) have been developed to address these limitations, but have not been broadly adopted, and many exhibit effectiveness by compromising comfort and convenience (14, 15) .

