Abstract

Background: The important role of primary care in promoting healthy lifestyle behaviours needs informed support.Aim: To elicit views on a 39-item shared decision-making (SDM) aid (SHARE-D) for lifestyle change and refine it to improve implementation.Design & setting: Mixed-methods study.Method: Health professionals, patients, and support workers, with experience of managing or a history of cardio-or cerebrovascular disease, were purposively recruited based on age, sex, and urban/rural location (n = 34). Participants completed a survey, rating the importance of including each item in a decision-aid, designed for use by patients with health professionals, and suggesting modifications. Semi-structured interviews (n = 30/34) were conducted and analysed thematically.Results: Substantial agreement was observed on rating item inclusion. Based on survey and interview data, 9/39 items were removed; 13 were amended. Qualitative themes were: 1) core content of the decision-aid; 2) barriers to use; 3) motivation for lifestyle change; and 4) primary care implementation. 'Self-reflective' questions and goal setting were viewed as essential components. The paper-based format, length, clarity, and time required were barriers to its use. Optional support considered within the aid was seen as important to motivate change. A digital version, integrated into patient record systems was regarded as critical to implementation. A revised 30-item aid was considered suitable for facilitating brief conversations and promoting patient autonomy.The SHARE-D decision aid for healthy lifestyle change appears to have good content validity and acceptability. Survey and interview data provided in-depth information to support implementation of a refined version. Further studies should examine its effectiveness.SDM can ensure that patients' individual care needs and preferences are met. There is limited evidence about using these approaches for promoting behaviour change, or how they could work best in general practice. This mixed methods study explored the views of patients and health professionals on an existing decision-making aid. Findings highlighted how the aid could be used to structure brief conversations about lifestyle change. Recommendations are made to support its use in primary care.Heron N et al.

