Abstract

pandemic has led to an unprecedented scarcity of N95 respirators. [1] [2] [3] [4] The Johns Hopkins Hospital (JHH), a 1,162-bed tertiarycare academic hospital in Baltimore, Maryland, cared for >1,000 inpatients with COVID-19 since March 2020. Early in the pandemic, to preserve existing N95 respirator supplies, JHH implemented a contingency capacity strategy of N95 reuse, where an N95 with the protection of a face shield is donned for a single patient contact, then doffed and stored before being used by the same healthcare worker (HCW) for other patient contacts. HCWs were trained in the correct N95 donning and doffing practices, including direct observations and feedback. HCWs were encouraged by hospital leadership to reuse their N95 due to critical shortages; however, they could obtain a new N95 from their department at any time if there was concern for functional or structural integrity (ie, soiling or damage to any part of the N95, or failure to attain an adequate seal on leak testing) of the respirator. This change in practice was unprecedented, so we surveyed HCWs to understand their perceptions, attitudes, and practices regarding the reuse of N95s.We developed a 16-item questionnaire using a web-based survey tool (Qualtrics, Provo, UT), and we pilot tested it with 7 HCWs to ensure that the questions were understood as intended. In July 2020, the survey was shared with HCWs working on units caring for patients with COVID-19, and among those who had reused an N95 at least once since March 2020. Survey responses were anonymized, each HCW could only respond once, and the survey closed 4 weeks after becoming available. We did not incentivize participation. Responses on a 5-point Likert scale were collapsed into 2 categories (eg, agree/strongly agree and neutral/ disagree/strongly disagree) 5 and were analyzed using nonparametric tests (ie, Fisher's exact and Wilcoxon-rank sum tests) using STATA version 16.0 software (StataCorp, College Station, TX). A 2-sided P value < .05 was considered statistically significant.

