Abstract

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, many key neglected tropical disease (NTD) activities have been postponed. This hindrance comes at a time when the NTDs are progressing towards their ambitious goals for 2030. Mathematical modelling on several NTDs, namely gambiense sleeping sickness, lymphatic filariasis, onchocerciasis, schistosomiasis, soil-transmitted helminthiases (STH), trachoma, and visceral leishmaniasis, shows that the impact of this disruption will vary across the diseases. Programs face a risk of resurgence, which will be fastest in high-transmission areas. Furthermore, of the mass drug administration diseases, schistosomiasis, STH, and trachoma are likely to encounter faster resurgence. The case-finding diseases (gambiense sleeping sickness and visceral leishmaniasis) are likely to have fewer cases being detected but may face an increasing underlying rate of new infections. However, once programs are able to resume, there are ways to mitigate the impact and accelerate progress towards the 2030 goals.The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic will have wide-reaching implications for health systems and programs, including among populations in whom neglected tropical diseases (NTDs) are endemic. In the short term, preliminary World Health Organization (WHO) guidance advises that NTD surveys, active case detection activities, and mass drug administration (MDA) campaigns should be postponed, while support for prompt diagnosis, treatment, and essential vector control should continue where possible [1]. The impact of program disruptions on the hard-won gains of reduced infection, morbidity, and mortality, and therefore on elimination timelines, is uncertain. Mathematical modelling, such as that carried out by the NTD Modelling Consortium, can provide quantitative insights on how NTD programs could be impacted by the delays while showing potential catch-up strategies to mitigate impacts (ntdmodelling.org/covidinterruption.pdf). These models suggest that the impact on some NTDs can be mitigated in the years to come, provided the delay is minimal and that prompt remedial (and in some cases novel) action is taken.During a disruption to interventions, the transmission of infectious diseases will gradually rise back towards the preintervention level unless interventions are reintroduced. The resulting rate of resurgence in prevalence depends on the rate at which new infections occur, which is driven by the natural histories of the disease and the local transmission conditions. The resurgence rates for many NTDs are relatively slow, particularly when compared with other infectious diseases, such as measles and malaria, meaning that the impact of a short disruption to

