Abstract

The coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic has illuminated the chasm of societal inequality and vulnerability within the United Kingdom concurrently highlighted by the February 2020 Marmot Review [1] . These inequalities and vulnerabilities have been omnipresent in other public health crises, such as child mental health [2], childhood obesity levels [3] , and, of most relevance to this piece, physical inactivity [4] . Rather than addressing the underlying inequalities driving these crises, governments have placed schools on the frontline of delivering solutions.Researchers also recognise the attractiveness of the school setting for applying researchdriven solutions to childhood physical inactivity because the majority of young people can be easily reached. Evaluation of school-based physical activity programmes using the rigid cluster randomised controlled trial (RCT) design aim to contribute high-quality evidence on approaches to tackling physical inactivity. The National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) in the UK is one funder that has invested significant funds in large school-based cluster RCTs (see the online NIHR Journals Library for examples). These trials overcame methodological weaknesses identified in previous systematic reviews [5] by having a robust design, adequate power, using objective behaviour measures, having longer follow-up, and evaluated contextually appropriate programmes with, when possible, a theory and feasibility evidence base.The Corder and colleagues paper in this PLOS Medicine special issue [6] is the latest example of such a trial. The authors report on the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of a theorydriven, feasibility-tested physical activity promotion programme for 12 to 14 year olds in 16 UK secondary schools. The GoActive programme saw mentors and peer leaders encouraging pupils to try novel physical activities inside and outside of school time. The programme ran over 12 weeks; 6 weeks were supported by external facilitators from the community before this support was phased out. Despite the potential, the GoActive programme was not effective at preventing declines in physical activity in the regional sample of UK adolescents. The difference in objectively measured moderate-to vigorous-intensity physical activity was −1.9 (confidence interval: −5.5 to 1.7) minutes/day at 10 month post intervention follow-up. At a cost of £13 per pupil, it was also deemed not to be cost effective. In line with a recent review of trial implementation [7], issues with fidelity in programme delivery (between 12% and 64% of students across schools attended a GoActive session and less than 50% engaged with the accompanying website) are posited to be responsible.Despite the methodological quality of this and previous trials, effectiveness (through the narrow definition of positively affecting the primary outcome) has been limited. Little new knowledge of what works, or clear results that have led to policy or provision change, has PLOS MEDICINE PLOS Medicine | https://doi.

