| INTRODUCTION

In December 2019, a novel coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) (i.e., coronavirus disease 2019 ), spread in Hubei, China. The virus caused a variety of symptoms, ranging from asymptomatic/mild symptoms to serious impairments and death. 1 The spread of COVID-19 has led to significant morbidity and mortality worldwide, 2 causing high levels of stress, fear, and anxiety about this extremely contagious, rapidly spreading virus. 3 Anxiety was related to fears of being infected, infecting others, and concerns about its associated comorbidities and high mortality rate. Loss of normal routines, reduction of activities, and a severe economic recession contributed to increasing stress and worsening mental health. A previous systematic review on large-scale disasters revealed increased depression, anxiety, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), substance misuse, and domestic violence. 4 The severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) epidemic was also associated with increased psychological distress in patients and clinicians. 5 The first study in China on the impact of COVID-19 found elevated depression and anxiety in a sample of 1210 individuals: 17% reported moderate-severe depression and 29% moderate-severe anxiety. 6 A study in Hong Kong screened 500 adults using wellvalidated screening tools (i.e., Patient Health Questionnaire and General Anxiety Disorder-PHQ-9 and GAD-7), reporting high levels of depression (19%) and anxiety (14%). Further, 25% of the sample reported a worsening of mental health due to the pandemic. 7 Adolescents in China also reported high levels of depression (43.7%) and anxiety (37.4%) using PHQ-9 and GAD-7. 8 Similar elevations in psychological distress have been documented across the world. [9] [10] [11] As the pandemic spread throughout Italy and Europe, new mental health concerns were raised by people with cystic fibrosis (pwCF) and parent caregivers, who are already at increased risk for depression and anxiety. [12] [13] [14] Before the pandemic, numerous studies have indicated that psychological symptoms in pwCF are associated with worse adherence, more frequent hospitalizations, and earlier mortality. 15, 16 In response to this pandemic, several studies have been conducted to evaluate its impact on pwCF and caregivers. 14, 17, 18 Havermans et al. 17 reported on 80 adults with cystic fibrosis (CF), 66 adults who had received a lung transplant, and 73 parent caregivers.This was a survey study in which the authors asked these three groups to rank order their psychological concerns. The top-ranked concerns for adults with CF were "afraid of being infected by the virus" and "extra alert for dangerous situations," and "I cannot adhere to my usual routines." These same top three concerns were also endorsed by parents. Thus, anxiety and fear were the predominant psychological issues for both. Although both groups reported disruption in their daily routines, they also reported spending more time on nebulized treatments and airway clearance. Increased stress, negative thoughts, and trouble sleeping were also reported by both pwCF and parents. 17 In a study of adolescents with CF and their mothers, 18 anxiety was measured using the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. Mothers of children with CF reported higher trait anxiety than age-matched controls. In contrast, healthy children and their parents reported higher state anxiety than the group with CF, unless the child was colonized with Pseudomonas infection. In that case, their state anxiety was also quite elevated.As Italy became a COVID-19 "hot spot," concerns about the psychological functioning of pwCF increased. In a large study in Italy, an online questionnaire, the COVID-19 Peritraumatic Distress Index, was completed in an adapted form by 712 pwCF and 3560 respondents from the general population. 19 Psychological distress in the mild to moderate range affected similar proportions of both samples; 40.2% of pwCF and 43.9% of the general population. Severe distress was endorsed by 5.3% of pwCF and 6.2% of the controls.Thus, although a majority of respondents were reporting substantial psychological distress, there were no differences by health status.To address these concerns, psychologists on the CF Team at Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital developed and piloted a Telehealth Psychological Support Intervention. It targeted adolescents/young adults with CF and caregivers, providing them with cognitive-behavioral strategies to cope with the stress and emotional challenges of the lockdown in March. The lockdown was highly restrictive: schools and universities were closed, people were told to work from home, and individuals could go out only for essential tasks (e.g., supermarket, pharmacy). Access to routine healthcare also changed for pwCF and many were afraid of coming to the CF Center; in-person appointments were reserved for those with serious health problems. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effectiveness of a cognitive-behavioral telehealth intervention to reduce symptoms of stress, depression, and anxiety in pwCF and parents during the lockdown. This 4-session telehealth intervention was delivered via the internet and was aimed at reducing psychological symptomatology. Feasibility and Satisfaction were assessed.

| Procedure

This study was a within-subject, pre-post design. Because we initiated the study during an emergency situation, 1 week after the complete lockdown in Italy, the Ethics Committee was not meeting frequently. A summary of the project and consent forms were sent to the Ethics Committee at Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, and they notified us of their approval. It involved pwCF, ages 12-36 years, and caregivers of pwCF younger than 18. Enrollment criteria included diagnosis of CF, ages 12 and older, and parents of children with CF. Exclusion criteria were mainly related to age, having a stable internet connection, and familiarity with using the internet. Participants completed measures electronically; medical data were extracted from charts. lockdown. Participation in the intervention was also shared through social media (e.g., Facebook, Instagram). A dedicated phone line accepted requests for participation. Participants completed four "zoom" sessions using online video platforms, 30-40 min each, conducted by a clinical psychologist on the CF Team. Participants were asked to find a quiet, private place using headphones and microphones.Written, informed consent was obtained by sending the consent form via email or "whatsapp" and getting the signature. All individuals provided a stress rating (10-point Likert scale) at the beginning of each session and completed the PHQ-8 and GAD-7 measures at the preand post-assessment. For the stress ratings, the psychologist asked the participant for their rating and it was recorded in an excel file.PHQ-8 and GAD-7 were completed online using a link that was emailed to them. Once they completed the questionnaires, they were automatically sent to the Principal Investigator. Feasibility and Satisfaction were rated 1 week after the last session using an email link.

| Analytic plan

This was a within-subject, cohort design, using each participant as his/her own control. Analyses of the major endpoints were conducted on each individual's score from pre to post on the measured variables (i.e., stress ratings, depression, anxiety).

| Demographic and medical characteristics

Participants completed a demographic form (e.g., age, gender, education); measures of physical health status were collected via chart review: (a) FEV 1 % predicted, (b) body mass index (BMI), (c) pancreatic insufficiency, and (d) CF-related diabetes. Health outcome data that is collected at each clinic visit, such as FEV 1 and BMI were extracted from electronic medical records from the last clinic visit. Typically, before the pandemic, these visits occurred every 2-3 months.

| Perceived stress ratings

At the beginning of each session, a stress rating was elicited, asking participants to evaluate their perceived level of stress on an ad hoc, 10point Likert scale, ranging from 1 (not stressed at all) to 10 (extremely stressed).

| PHQ-8 (Patient Health Questionnaire-8 item)

The PHQ-9 20 is a brief, self-administered measure of depressive symptoms, with nine items that fit the diagnostic criteria for Major Depressive Disorder. It is free, available in all major world languages and recommended by international guidelines. 15, 21 It has extensive reliability (Cronbach's α = .86-.89) and validity. 22 The minimal important difference (MID) score of 5 points, in either direction, has been established as a clinically meaningful change. 23 This is a screening instrument and thus, does not represent a clinical diagnosis.However, strong correlations have been found between scores on the PHQ-9/8 and diagnoses. PHQ-8 was used because sessions were remotely, the country was in a heightened state of alert, and asking about suicidal ideation (Item #9: thoughts that you would be better off dead, or of hurting yourself) was not clinically appropriate. This is recommended when you are not able to provide immediate assistance to someone who endorses this question. The recall period is 2 weeks, using a 4-point frequency scale. Severity of depressive symptoms was categorized as "no symptoms" (0-4), "mild symptoms" (5-9), "moderate symptoms" (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) and "severe symptoms" (≥15) range. 24 The Italian version was used (http://www.phqscreeners.com/).

| GAD-7 (Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7 item)

The GAD-7 is a brief, 7-item self-report measure of anxiety, rated on a 4-point Likert scale. 25 This is a screening instrument and does not represent a clinical diagnosis. However, strong correlations have been found between scores on the GAD-7 and diagnosed anxiety. It has extensive reliability and validity (Cronbach's α = .92). The total score was categorized into "no symptoms" (0-4), "mild" (5-9), "moderate" (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) , and "severe" (≥15) range. The MID score of 4 points, in either direction, has been established as a clinically meaningful change. 26 The Italian version of this instrument was used.

| Feasibility and Satisfaction

Feasibility of participation (1 "not at all practical" to 4 "very practical") and Satisfaction with the intervention (1 to 4 from "not at all" to "very satisfied") were assessed using ad hoc scales, 1 week after the last session. Two feasibility questions were asked (How practical/easy was it to participate in the program? Do you think the program should continue?) and two items were rated for satisfaction (Did you find it helpful to participate in this program? How satisfied were you with this program?).

| Telehealth psychological support intervention

This intervention utilized evidence-based Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) skills for depression and anxiety ( Figure 1 ) which have been published in numerous references. [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] The 4-session intervention focused on self-care (e.g., relaxation training, daily CF treatments), coping skills (e.g., cognitive reframing), exercises to improve mood, and individual, emotional challenges (e.g., extreme fear of the virus). In Session 1, individuals were asked to describe their stressful experiences with the pandemic and consider coping strategies that had been useful, identify their own resilience skills (e.g., call a friend for support), and protective factors (e.g., family support, reducing time watching the news).Initially, there was tremendous fear about the pandemic, and pwCF and caregivers were engaging in a lot of catastrophic thinking (e.g., this virus can kill me). In all sessions, therapists encouraged a focus on the present moment and emphasized how well-prepared they were to deal with COVID-19, given their CF experience with infection control. A toolkit of cognitive-behavioral skills was built and used flexibly in all sessions to promote psychological and physical health ( Figure 1 ). CBT skills included: cognitive reframing (facilitating positive thoughts), relaxation training, increasing positive emotions, and getting physical exercise. One exercise, "catching joy," 32 asked them to identify three moments of joy each day and record them in WhatsApp; these joyful moments were discussed in the next session.The importance of maintaining normal routines was reinforced, which included getting up and dressed, performing CF treatments, getting good sleep, and identifying activities that increased positive mood (e.g., cooking a favorite dish, listening to music).During each session, individuals were asked to describe a recent stressful experience with COVID-19 and the effects of the lockdown.Next, they were asked about coping with this stressor and discussed new strategies they could use. Time was also spent identifying the "upsides" of the lockdown (i.e., reframing), having more time for CF treatments, watching movies as a family, and for parents, spending more time with their children. In general, increasing positive emotions and adaptive thinking were fostered to counter negative thoughts, and self-efficacy and resilience were encouraged. (Table 1 ). All participants completed the measures (100%).A majority of pwCF were in middle school. Most parents were unemployed (46%), some worked from home, and some were furloughed.

| Clinical and psychological characteristics

Average lung function (FEV 1 %) was 67%, average BMI was 22, and 81% were pancreatic insufficient ( Table 2 ). At baseline, average stress ratings were fairly high: 7.1 for pwCF and 7.8 for parents out of 10 points (Table 3) . A large percentage of participants in both groups scored in the clinically elevated range on the screening measures (scores ≥ of 5) prior to the intervention. The mean score on the PHQ-8 was 8.0 for pwCF and 6.4 for parents, respectively. The mean score on the GAD-7 was 6.9 for pwCF and 8.1 for parents, respectively. Among patients, 71% scored in the elevated range on both depression and anxiety, with most in the mild-moderate range. Among parents, 57% scored in the elevated range of depression, with most reporting mild-moderate severity, and 79% scored in the elevated range for anxiety, with 45% scoring in the moderate-severe range (Table 3) . indicating that it ranges from a medium to large effect. Symptoms of anxiety decreased, 6.9 at pretest to 5.6 at posttest, but were not statistically significant (paired t test, t(15) = 1.2, p = NS-non-significant; Figure 2 ).

| Categorical changes in symptoms of depression

Next, categorical changes from pre-to post-testing were analyzed. At baseline, 25% (n = 4) of pwCF had no symptoms of depression, 31.2% (n = 5) were mild, 37.5% (n = 5) moderate, and 6.3% (n = 1) severe (Table 3) . Overall, most pwCF remained stable from pre-to post-testing (56.2%; n = 9), 37.5% (n = 6) of pwCF reported decreases in depression and 1 individual (6.3%; n = 1) reported worse symptoms. Specifically, six pwCF improved, one worsened, and nine remained stable. For those in the mild range (n = 5), all remained mild. The largest changes were observed in three pwCF who were moderate at pre and dropped into the no symptoms category, followed by two pwCF who were moderate but dropped into the mild category. The person who worsened reported no symptoms at pre-testing but had a 1-point increase at post-testing in that mild range.

| Categorical changes in symptoms of anxiety

Categorical changes were also analyzed for anxiety. At baseline, 25% of pwCF had no symptoms (n = 4), 56.2% were mild (n = 9), 12.5% moderate (n = 2), and 6.3% severe (n = 1) (Table 3) . Overall, most pwCF remained stable (n = 11; 68.7%), 25% (n = 4) reported decreases in anxiety and one person (6.3%) reported no symptoms at pre-testing, but reported mild symptoms at post-testing. For those who were mild at pretesting (n = 9), all remained mild. Although stability or improvements were observed in most pwCF, changes in anxiety were less substantial.We utilized the MID (PHQ-9 = 5 points; GAD-7 = 4 points) in the next analysis to examine the percentage of pwCF who made clinically significant improvements. More than one-third of the sample (37%; n = 6) reported a clinically meaningful change in depression and 17% (n = 3) reported meaningful changes in anxiety.

| Intervention results: Parent caregivers

Similar results emerged for parents. Statistically significant decreases were found in stress ratings, 7.8 at the pre-test to 5.7 at post-testing (paired t test, t(13) = 5.2, p < .001). The effect size, using F I G U R E 2 Pre-post Telehealth Psychological Support Intervention. Notes: Data are presented as paired t tests. *p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001. NS, non-significant; PwCF, people with cystic fibrosis (n = 5) reported mild symptoms, 28.6% (n = 4) were moderate, and 14.3% (n = 2) reported severe symptoms (Table 3) . Most parents remained stable (n = 7; 50%), however, 28.6% (n = 4) reported decreases in anxiety and three parents (21.4%) reported worsening of anxiety at the post-testing. Six (42.9%) parents were stable; three remained mild (21.4%) and three moderate (21.4%). Two parents made dramatic improvements, reporting severe symptoms at pre and mild symptoms at post-testing (14.3%).The next analysis examined the percentage of parents who made a clinically significant improvement. One parent reported a clinically meaningful improvement in depressive symptoms and two parents reported clinically meaningful improvements in anxiety. 

| DISCUSSION

At the beginning of the COVID-19 crisis in Italy, rates of depression and anxiety were highly elevated in pwCF (71%) and parents (57% depression, 79% anxiety), with a large proportion scoring in the moderate to severe range. Ratings of stress were also highly elevated during this crisis. Importantly, these rates of psychological symptomatology were much higher during the COVID-19 lockdown, than those obtained during routine CF care before COVID-19. 12 

| Limitations and conclusions

This study had several limitations. First, there was no control group to compare to those in active treatment. Thus, we could not account for the effects of time and attention or possible regression to the mean. To attribute these positive results to the effect of this CBT intervention will require a randomized, controlled trial or a waitlist control group design.A second limitation was a potential bias in the recruitment of participants. Although invitation letters were sent to all families at the CF Center, pwCF who enrolled in this study tended to have lower lung function than the CF Center generally, and two pwCF were being evaluated for the lung transplant list.Third, this intervention was not as comprehensive or structured as a traditional CBT treatment because it was shorter (four sessions; usually 8-10) and was not guided by a manual. Instead, it was individualized to the concerns participants' raised about their own needs.Finally, this intervention was limited by a small sample size. Although we obtained statistically significant decreases in both stress and depression, with medium to large effect sizes, this study was underpowered. This might have accounted for the lack of statistical significance in anxiety scores, which decreased but did not meet standard, p < .05 criteria.Our study results indicated that this telehealth intervention was effective in reducing stress and symptoms of depression in both pwCF and caregivers, and was rated by participants as feasible and satisfactory. This intervention will require further evaluation with a larger sample to establish its efficacy. In addition, this brief intervention is not a substitute for a comprehensive CBT program or ongoing psychological support from a mental health expert on the CF Team. A future randomized, controlled trial of this intervention is being planned to test its efficacy. 

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. 

