Introduction

COronaVirus Disease 2019 can be challenging to diagnose, because symptoms are non-specific, clinical presentations are heterogeneous, and false negative tests can occur. 1 While most patients hospitalized with COVID-19 will have lymphopenia, it is unknown if lymphopenia can differentiate between COVID-19 and other respiratory infections. 2 Our objective was to assess the utility of lymphocyte count to differentiate COVID-19 from influenza or communityacquired pneumonia (CAP).

Methods

We conducted cohort study of adults hospitalized with COVID-19 or another respiratory infection (i.e., influenza, CAP) at seven hospitals in Ontario, Canada. 3 The influenza cohort and CAP cohort spanned September to April, 2020, and the COVID-19 cohort spanned January to June, 2020 (most recent available data). CAP was identified using a previously developed definition combining a diagnosis of CAP with receipt of antibiotic that is typically used for CAP (in-press). Influenza was defined using ICD10 diagnostic codes (positive-predictive-value > 90%). 4 Patients with COVID-19 who also met the criteria for CAP or influenza were assigned to the COVID-19 group. The first available lymphocyte count during the hospitalization was used.Standard test characteristics for lymphocyte count (x10 9 /L) were calculated (i.e., sensitivity, specificity, area under the receiver operating curve [AUC]). All analyses were conducting using R.All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. 

Results

There were 869 hospitalizations for COVID-19, 669 for influenza, and 3009 for CAP. The mean age across the three groups was 67 and patients with pneumonia were older than those with influenza or COVID19, and approximately 46% were woman. The median lymphocyte count was nearly identical for the three groups of patients: 1.0 x10 9 /L (interquartile range[IQR]:0.7,2.0) for COVID-19, 0.9 x10 9 /L (IQR 0.6,1.0) for influenza, and 1.0 x10 9 /L (IQR 0.6,2.0) for CAP. At a lymphocyte threshold of 1.0 the sensitivity and specificity for diagnosing COVID was less than 50% (Table 1) . At higher lymphocyte thresholds the sensitivity increased and the specificity decreased (Table 1 ). For example, at a threshold of 2.0 the sensitivity and specificity was 87% and approximately 10%, respectively. The AUC for lymphocyte count was 54% when patients with influenza were the comparator and 51% when patients with CAP were the comparator (Table 1, Figure 1 ).

Discussion

Among hospitalized adults, the lymphocyte count was similar for patients with COVID-19, influenza, and CAP. The AUC was close to 0.5, indicating that lymphocyte count has similar accuracy to a coin-toss in determining whether the patient has COVID-19 or another respiratory illness. Thus, lymphocyte count alone is unlikely to be useful to differentiate between COVID-19 and other respiratory illnesses. While lymphopenia is non-specific and thus does not help to rule in COVID-19, the absence of a lymphocyte count above 2.0 may help to rule out COVID-19 (sensitivity of 87%). It is unknown if these findings also apply to patients with mild disease who are not hospitalized. Another important limitation of our study is that we lacked data on chronic medical conditions pre-dating the hospitalization known to cause lymphopenia (e.g., hematologic Legend: COVID-19 COronaVirus Disease 2019, flu = influenza, CAP = community-acquired pneumonia, IQR = interquartile range, SD = standard deviation. Comp = comparator. Note there is only one sensitivity value and two specificity values because the former is calculated as the true positive / all patients with COVID (i.e., true positive plus false negative) while the specificity is calculated as the true negative / all patients who did not have COVID (i.e., they could have had pneumonia or influenza defined as true negative plus false positive) All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. Legend: CAP = community acquired pneumonia All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 20, 2021. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.17.21252922 doi: medRxiv preprint

