Introduction

Cytomegalovirus (CMV), a double-stranded DNA virus from the Herpesviridae family, is considered one of the most common causes of infection in humans. Like other herpesviruses, CMV has lifelong latency within the body after primary infection (1) . The primary infection is mostly asymptomatic, whereas reactivation in patients with immunosuppressed status may be life-threatening, and is associated with a high rate of morbidities (2) . A systematic review by Rafailidis et al. reported that the gastrointestinal (GI) tract was among the systems involved most frequently in severe CMV infections (3) . Here we report the first case (to our knowledge) of a previously immunocompetent patient who developed CMV-induced gastric ulcers after severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection.

Case presentation

A 33-year-old man was referred to our center with complaints of persistent dysphagia and odynophagia, and epigastric pain and discomfort after his discharge from the hospital following admission because of coronavirus disease . His symptoms were aggravated by the intake of solids or liquids, and had appeared about 1 week previously. The patient also complained of a new-onset symptom of feeling sick.The patient was diagnosed with Covid-19 about 35 days previously, and remained hospitalized for about 1 month. Prior to his admission the patient had no previous medical history. He had flu-like symptoms including fever, fatigue, sore throat, cough, headache, and generalized body pain for 4 days; however, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing for SARS-CoV-2 from a nasopharyngeal swab was negative. The patient was advised to home-quarantine and use conservative treatment. On day 4 after he started showing these symptoms, his medical condition deteriorated and he presented to the emergency department with progressive shortness of breath and palpitations (day 1). On arrival the patient had tachycardia (pulse rate 110/min), tachypnea (respiratory rate 24/min), and fever (temperature 37.8 °C). He was oriented and awake, but was dehydrated (dry mouth and tongue) and hypoxemic (O2 saturation 89), requiring 4-6 L/min of supplemental oxygen via cannula. The patient underwent chest computed tomography (CT) which revealed radiologic signs typical of Covid-19, including extensive areas of ground-glass opacities involving >90% of the lung parenchyma. Laboratory studies revealed leukocytosis (16,400 cells/mL) with marked neutropenia (80%). Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (56 mg/dL) and C-reactive protein (43 mg/dL) were both increased. Other laboratory parameters including hemoglobin, platelets, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, and liver function tests were within normal limits.Two blood cultures were done during his inpatient stay, both of which showed no growth. A second SARS-J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f CoV-2 RT-PCR performed on admission was positive. On the 3rd day of hospitalization, the patient's oxygen saturation decreased and noninvasive positive pressure ventilation was started. During his inpatient stay due to SARS-CoV-2 infection, the patient received broad-spectrum antibiotics, remdesivir, methylprednisolone, two doses of tocilizumab, and supportive therapy. In the final days of the patient's hospital stay (day 28-30), he developed mild epigastric discomfort and was given a proton pump inhibitor.Five days after the patient's first discharge (day 35), he was readmitted for new symptoms he had recently developed, i.e., dysphagia and epigastric discomfort. The patient's vital signs were stable. In his paraclinical workup he had a normal white blood cell count (6400 cells/mL) with a decreased lymphocyte count (1100 cells/mL), and thrombocytopenia (110,000 cells/mL); other routine laboratory parameters were within normal limits. Immune system tests were done, including human immunodeficiency virus antibody serology, complement and immunoglobulin levels, and flow-cytometric analysis of lymphocyte subpopulations. However, none of them was suggestive of an underlying immunodeficiency disorder. To determine the cause of his low level of platelets, laboratory tests including peripheral blood smear, viral markers (hepatitis B surface antigen, and hepatitis C virus antibody), lupus markers (antinuclear and antideoxyribonucleic acid antibodies), and color Doppler sonography of the hepatic portal system were done, but yielded no significant findings. Because the patient reported that he had white oral mucosal lesions that appeared after his first hospital discharge, our primary impression was GI candidiasis. Therefore, we started the patient on nystatin drop and fluconazole.On second day after readmission (day 36), endoscopy was conducted. It showed mild inflammation along with a few whitish exudates in the proximal and distal third of the esophagus, and a large gastric ulcer from the fundus extending to the body of the stomach ( Figure 1 ). The lesion had inflamed, elevated borders but no bleeding. A black exudate highly suggestive of mucormycosis was seen covering the gastric ulcer. Brushing for KOH and cytology tests were done, and a biopsy was obtained from the margins of the lesion. Meanwhile, liposomal amphotericin B (AmBiosme; 300 mg i.v. daily) was initiated for the patient.Paranasal and abdominopelvic CT scans revealed no extragastrointestinal involvement. Histopathological assessment of the biopsy specimens showed an acute inflammatory process along with granulation tissue formation, but no evidence of mucormycosis or malignant cells. Figure 3C ). Ganciclovir was then started at 300 mg i.v. daily. After about 72 hours, the patient's symptoms had improved and his dysphagia and abdominal pain had lessened. He received ganciclovir for 3 weeks, after which a new endoscopy showed a healed ulcer in the body of stomach. Interestingly, the patient's platelet level also normalized after CMV treatment, suggesting CMV infection as a probable underlying cause of his thrombocytopenia.

Discussion

SARS-CoV-2 infection can present with a wide range of symptoms. Those related to the GI tract including loss of appetite, nausea, abdominal pain, and diarrhea are common in these patients, and some symptoms can last for weeks to months after recovery (4). In a systematic review and metaanalysis of 33 studies, the pooled prevalence of GI manifestations was estimated to be 11.51% with diarrhea as the most frequent symptom (7.78% with a 95% confidence interval, range 5.05─11.04) (5) . Furthermore, the incidence and In contrast to other cases in the literature, our patient was young and had no known previous medical history. The average age of patients reported to date was 65.2 ± 9.5 years, and all had a history of at least one chronic disease (Table 1) Treatment with immunosuppressive agents can also be responsible for CMV reactivation. A high-dose infusion of corticosteroids and tocilizumab, an interleukin-6 receptor antagonist, was used for our patient.Interleukin-6 is known to play a pivotal role in optimal activation and regulation of the immune response,particularly T-cell response, during viral infections (11) . Tocilizumab suppresses this antiviral activity by blocking the interleukin-6 receptor. Among the cases of GI involvement reported to date in patients with CMV, 5 patients had received an interleukin-6 receptor antagonist. CMV reactivation has also been reported in patients without Covid-19 who were taking tocilizumab. Komura et al. reported a 54-year-old woman with a history of rheumatoid arthritis who was being treated with a corticosteroid, methotrexate and tocilizumab (12) . After taking this biologic agent for about 3 weeks, the patient developed epigastric pain and fever, and she was diagnosed with CMV reactivation-induced acute hepatitis and gastric erosions. In addition, infection with other viruses such as Herpes zoster or Epstein-Barr virus (among others) has been observed in patients with or without Covid-19 who were treated with interleukin-6 receptor antagonists (13, 14) . Although the evidence to date is insufficient to indicate a significantly higher risk of viral reactivation including CMV in patients with Covid-19 who are using interleukin-6 receptor antagonist therapy, this potential issue should be of concern to physicians.

J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f

This case report provides comprehensive information on gastrointestinal CMV involvement associated with Covid-19. The aims of this report are to alert clinicians to the importance of vigilance in the face of an unexpected clinical course or prolonged gastrointestinal signs and symptoms in patients with Covid-19, and to remind them to consider other diseases such as CMV infection in order to prevent delays in early suspicion, diagnosis, and treatment. 

