

Inferior cellular and humoral immunity against Omicron and Delta variants of concern compared with SARS-CoV-2 wild type in hemodialysis patients immunized with 4 SARS-CoV-2 vaccine doses Q1 To the editor: With the dominance of the most recent severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) variant of concern Omicron (B.1.1.529), the question arises, what is the reason for its high contagiousness in coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)-vaccinated dialysis patients compared with the previous SARS-CoV-2 variants Delta and wild type?The objective of this study was, therefore, to analyze humoral and cellular immunity directed against the Omicron variant of concern compared with the wild-type or Delta variant of concern in hemodialysis patients (n ¼ 42; Supplementary Table S1) immunized with 4 doses of mRNA COVID-19 vaccine. Titers of neutralizing antibodies (NAbs) against wild type, Delta, and Omicron were estimated by SARS-CoV-2 spike-protein (S-protein) pseudovirus assays. T-cell immunity reactive against wild-type, Delta-derived, and Omicron-derived S-protein was analyzed by multiparameter flow cytometry. The analyses were performed 8 to 9 weeks following the fourth doses.The hemodialysis patients had a clear seroconversion after 4 doses of SARS-CoV-2 vaccination, with a significantly higher titer of NAb against wild type compared with Delta or Omicron S-protein (median [interquartile range]-ND50 , and 439 [160-1180], respectively). Interestingly, the NAb titer against Delta was significantly higher compared with Omicron-specific NAb (Figure 1a ). Although the number of patients with a detectable S-protein-reactive CD4 T-cell response was nearly identical (40-41 of 42 patients; Supplementary Table S2), the magnitude of response was significantly lower against Omicron-and Delta-derived S-protein compared with wild type (Figure 1b) . In contrast, significantly fewer patients showed a detectable S-protein-reactive CD8 T-cell response against Omicron but not Delta compared with wild type (P ¼ 0.0304, Fisher exact test; Supplementary Table S2 ), although the magnitude of response was not different between all 3 SARS-CoV-2 variants (Figure 1c) .With regard to the functionality, the frequency of Omicron and Delta S-protein-reactive CD4 þ T cells producing T helper cell 1 cytokines interferon-g and tumor necrosis factor was significantly lower compared with wild-type S-proteinreactive CD4þ T cells (Figure 1d and f) .In line with the results from the general populations, 1,2 hemodialysis patients show a clearly decreased humoral and cellular immune response against Omicron compared with SARS-CoV-2 wild type after 4 doses of vaccination. Of interest, Omicron-specific NAb titer was significantly lower compared with Delta-specific NAb, explaining the more efficient evasion of Omicron from neutralizing antibodies 3 and its efficient spread in vaccinated individuals. 4 Because the humoral immune response of dialysis patients strongly benefits from a fourth compared with a third vaccination, 5 an adjustment of the vaccination procedure should be recommended.

DATA STATEMENT

The data will be available on request. Table S1 . Cohort characteristics. Table S2 . Number of patients with CD4 or CD8 T-cell response. Figure S1 . Gating strategy to identify spike-protein (S-protein)reactive T cells among CD4 þ T and CD8 þ T cells Q4 .

