

I, the Submitting Author has the right to grant and does grant on behalf of all authors of the Work (as defined in the below author licence), an exclusive licence and/or a non-exclusive licence for contributions from authors who are: i) UK Crown employees; ii) where BMJ has agreed a CC-BY licence shall apply, and/or iii) in accordance with the terms applicable for US Federal Government officers or employees acting as part of their official duties; on a worldwide, perpetual, irrevocable, royalty-free basis to BMJ Publishing Group Ltd ("BMJ") its licensees and where the relevant Journal is co-owned by BMJ to the co-owners of the Journal, to publish the Work in this journal and any other BMJ products and to exploit all rights, as set out in our licence.The Submitting Author accepts and understands that any supply made under these terms is made by BMJ to the Submitting Author unless you are acting as an employee on behalf of your employer or a postgraduate student of an affiliated institution which is paying any applicable article publishing charge ("APC") for Open Access articles. Where the Submitting Author wishes to make the Work available on an Open Access basis (and intends to pay the relevant APC), the terms of reuse of such Open Access shall be governed by a Creative Commons licence -details of these licences and which Creative Commons licence will apply to this Work are set out in our licence referred to above.Other than as permitted in any relevant BMJ Author's Self Archiving Policies, I confirm this Work has not been accepted for publication elsewhere, is not being considered for publication elsewhere and does not duplicate material already published. I confirm all authors consent to publication of this Work and authorise the granting of this licence. 

Strengths and limitations

• Testing strategies for screening, diagnosis and follow-up of COVID-19 is a subject of debate.• We systematically reviewed worldwide documents for guidance on the use of tests for COVID-19, and we appraised all collated documents using AGREE-II.• There were significant areas of agreement among documents.• The limited level of evidence of the documents analysed hampers the conclusions drawn from our work of synthesis.• Future guidance documents should incorporate formal strategies for identification and assessment of the evidence to support recommendations about testing for COVID-19. Initial strategies have focused on case identification and contact tracing, as in previous coronavirus epidemics, (4) (5) (6) although testing on a massive scale has been also suggested as a key public health strategy. (6) (7) (8) Testing all patients with suspected infection is the ideal method for infection control, but several countries have limited testing capacity unrealistic and a prioritizing process is applied. (9) (10) (11) Testing used in screening, diagnosis and follow up of COVID-19 has been a subject of debate.Besides symptoms and signs, tests such as RT-PCR assays, antibody and serology tests (including lgG and lgM) as well as imaging (chest computed tomography, ultrasound and chest X-ray), have been considered for this condition. Population, index tests, outcomes) can be consulted in Appendix 1.

Data sources and searches

We searched guideline repositories and websites of government agencies, scientific societies and international organizations related to COVID-19 management, such as the World Health Organization (WHO), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), as well as manual searching of 28 websites (Appendix 2). In addition, we searched MEDLINE (Ovid SP, 1946 to June 26th , 2020), Embase (Ovid SP, 1982 to June 26th , 2020), and LILACS (iAH English) (BIREME, 1982 to June 26th , 2020). We also search on internet for documents from the 30 countries more affected by COVID-19 confirmed cases, as reported by the WHO in the situation report #153 (22) (see list of countries in appendix 3). We did not apply any language, geographic or publication status restrictions. We used EndNote X9 software to create a database for the management of the search results. 

Study selection and quality assessment

Two reviewers applied the eligibility criteria and extracted relevant data on main characteristics from potentially relevant documents, registering reasons for exclusion. An additional reviewer checked all the extracted information for accuracy (non-independent verification). For the quality assessment of included documents, two reviewers independently rated each document using the AGREE-II tool. (23) This tool consisted of 23 key items organized in six domains: scope and purpose, stakeholder involvement, rigour of development, clarity of presentation, applicability, editorial independence and two overall evaluation items. Each item was graded using a scale of 7 points: from 1, meaning "Strongly disagree", to 7, meaning "Strongly agree". The total was presented as a percentage of the maximum possible score for that domain (from 0 to 100%). Discrepancies were resolved by a consensus.

Data extraction and data synthesis

For each eligible document, we extracted information about the country and region where the document was developed, the date of last update, the main institution developing the guidance, the methodology used to produce the guidance document and the recommendations, as well as the assessment of conflict of interest. All recommendations provided by the included guidance documents were extracted in an Excel spreadsheet. We classified each recommendation according to their application, following the disease pathway suggested by Chen et al., (24) as follow: • Symptomatic illness grading disease severity: Those recommendations about the classification of confirmed cases and the assessment of severity to treatment decisions.• Symptomatic illness monitoring: Those recommendations about the follow-up of confirmed COVID-19 case for further treatment modifications.• Convalescence or de-isolation-discharge: Those recommendations about the end of deisolation or the hospital discharge of institutionalized patients.We extracted the test(s) covered by each recommendation in a standardized format, as well as the direction of the recommendation (for/ against), and their strength (weak, strong), if available. We generated tables and figures summarizing the role of tests during the COVID-19 testing, as well as the areas of consensus and recommendations supported by two or more documents. All descriptive analyses were performed in STATA 16.0. We followed the PRISMA guidelines for reporting scoping reviews. (25)

RESULTS

Electronic searches yielded 2102 citations from Medline, Embase and LILACS databases. In addition, we obtained 2803 documents from other resources ( Figure 1 ). Our initial screening of titles and abstracts identified 179 documents for assessment in full text, of which 31 were excluded due to 

Characteristics and quality of included guidance documents

Most of the included documents (n=26, 68%) were published de novo or have an updated version during April to June 2020 (Table 1) . Thirty-one documents were developed by institutions in America (n=13), Europe (n=9) and Asia (n=9). A considerable number of documents were developed by governmental agencies (n=18, 47%). Ten documents reported a methodology to their development, including search of primary evidence and use of other guidelines (30-32, 39, 40, 42, 47, 49, 54, 59) , while nine of them added a specific method to develop the recommendations, mostly based on expert consensus (30-32, 39, 40, 42, 47, 54, 59) . Ten documents did not present the recommendation in a clear format, such as a bullet list or a table, instead they present the recommended actions in paragraphs along with other epidemiological information (19, 20, 32, 36, 41, 43, 45, 50, 56, 60) . In addition, only 15 documents reported the assessment of conflict of interest among the members of the expert panel producing the recommendations (30, 31, 33, 38, 40-44, 47, 49, 54, 56, 58, 59) .Regarding the quality of included documents, we found that the domains with the highest scores were "Scope and purpose" (Median= 49%; IQR= 28 to 61) and "Clarity of presentation" (Median= 49%; IQR= 31 to 65) (Appendix 5). Domains with the lowest scores were "Applicability" (Median= 4; IQR= 0 to 21) and "Editorial independence" (Median= 0; IQR= 0 to 19) . Only five documents obtained at least 50% score for the "Rigor of development" domain. (30, 32, 40, 42, 59) Only nine documents obtained at least 50% scores for at least three AGREE-II domains. (19, 30, 32, 33, 40, 42, 45, 54, 59) (Appendix 5). The test most frequently recommended was the reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assays (80 recommendations), followed by chest CT (31 recommendations) , and chest US (21 recommendations). The test was not described or was unclearly reported in 28 recommendations (i.e. "COVID testing", "laboratory testing"). In addition, 78 recommendations reported tests for the investigation of other diagnoses, monitoring of disease and assessment of severity, such as blood counts, biomarkers, cultures and kidney and liver functions, among others. 13 the use chest CT and chest x-rays for grading severity. There was also consensus about when to repeat RT-PCR in cases of high suspicion of infection and negative findings, the collection of lower respiratory specimens to confirm an initial undetermined diagnosis, and the co-assessment for other respiratory pathogens.This scoping review was based on a comprehensive search and assessment of the literature about COVID-19 testing. We included guidance about COVID-19 testing from different expert panels from various countries around the world. We also performed a regular update of searches and updated our findings to reflect the current recommended practice in this field. Our last searches were performed in June 26 th , 2020 and we will consider updating this review with additional searches if new evidence modified our conclusions. However, our review has some limitations. We mostly relied on the search of guideline repositories, documents linked to scientific societies and publications in indexed journals to inform this scoping review. We considered that this strategy would identify documents with greater support given by experts and professional societies. Despite we conducted a specific search of guidance developed by experts based on the 30 countries more affected by the pandemic, it is possible that some such guidelines could be missing. Official agencies were probably not prepared to release their advice to governments in a sensitive political atmosphere.When we used the AGREE-II tool to assess the quality of all included documents we did not expect full compliance in all domains, but we did considered that a minimum of key characteristics would be fulfilled in documents providing formal recommendations for testing. (62) Unfortunately, we noted many deficiencies, a feature that was disturbing given that the severity of the pandemic demanded the highest level of rigour. Asociación Colombiana de Infectología. Consenso Colombiano de Atención, Diagnóstico y Manejo de la Infección por SARS-CoV-2/ COVID-19 en establecimientos de atención de la salud. Infectio. 2020;24(3 (S1)):1-163. 31 Cordovilla R, Álvarez S, Llanos L, Nuñez Ares A, Cases Viedma E, Díaz-Pérez D, et al. Recomendaciones de consenso SEPAR y AEER sobre el uso de la broncoscopia y la toma de muestras de la vía respiratoria en pacientes con sospecha o con infección confirmada por COVID- 19 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58 ) OR (tw:(2019 ncov)) OR (tw:(novel coronavirus)) OR (tw:(new coronavirus)) OR (tw:(wuhan OR "2019")) OR (tw:(wuhan AND coronavirus)))))) AND (tw:((tw:(guideline OR guidelines OR recommendati* OR consensus development OR critical pathways ))))) AND ( type_of_study:("guideline")) (6) No recommendations about diagnostic issues Testing for SARS CoV 2 in Scotland (7) No recommendations about diagnostic issues COVID-19 Guidance: Primary Care Providers in a Community Setting (8) No recommendations about diagnostic issues Interim Guidance: Public Health Management of cases and contacts associated with novel coronavirus in the community (9) No recommendations about diagnostic issues Choosing Wisely: COVID-19 recommendations (10) No recommendations about diagnostic issues Prince Edward Island Guidelines for the Management and Control of COVID- 19 (11) No recommendations about diagnostic issues Australian Health sector emergency response plan for novel coronavirus (12) No guideline/ recommendations Clinical guide for the management of respiratory patients during the coronavirus pandemic (13) 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46 19] . However, the currently available VTM-swab systems are often designed for one swab. Therefore, specimen packaging and shipping should be conducted carefully, as there is a risk of leakage during transportation. When collecting only one specimen, a nasopharyngeal swab is recommended first. It may be necessary to collect lower respiratory tract specimens, such as sputum; however, sputum induction is not indicated.

91

In the course of an epidemic, mass serological testing with rapid tests "on request", especially for detecting IgM class antibodies, can be used to identify asymptomatic infections once other means of reducing the epidemic have been exhausted.98 Imaging is not routinely indicated as a screening test for COVID-19 in asymptomatic individuals 98 COVID-19 testing is indicated in patients incidentally found to have findings suggestive of COVID-19 on a CT scan

102

The IDSA panel suggests SARS-CoV-2 RNA testing in asymptomatic individuals who are either known or suspected to have been exposed to COVID-19 (conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence).The IDSA panel suggests against SARS-CoV-2 RNA testing in asymptomatic individuals with no known contact with COVID-19 who are being hospitalized in areas with a low prevalence of COVID-19 in the community (conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence).The IDSA panel recommends direct SARS-CoV-2 RNA testing in asymptomatic individuals with no known contact with COVID-19 who are being hospitalized in areas with a high prevalence of COVID-19 in the community (i.e., hotspots) (conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence).The IDSA panel suggests that nasal and mid-turbinate (MT) swab specimens may be collected for SARS-CoV-2 RNA testing by either patients or healthcare providers, in symptomatic individuals with upper respiratory tract infection (URTI) or influenza like illness (ILI) suspected of having COVID-19 (conditional recommendation, low certainty of evidence).The IDSA panel suggests a strategy of initially obtaining an upper respiratory tract sample (e.g., nasopharyngeal swab) rather than a lower respiratory sample for SARS-CoV-2 RNA testing in hospitalized patients with suspected COVID-19 lower respiratory tract infection. If the initial upper respiratory sample result is negative, and the suspicion for disease remains high, the IDSA panel suggests collecting a lower respiratory tract sample (e.g., sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, tracheal aspirate) rather than collecting another upper respiratory sample (conditional recommendations, very low certainty of evidence).The IDSA panel suggests performing a single viral RNA test and not repeating testing in symptomatic individuals with a low clinical suspicion of COVID-19 (conditional recommendation, low certainty of evidence).The IDSA panel suggests repeating viral RNA testing when the initial test is negative (versus performing a single test) in symptomatic individuals with an intermediate or high clinical suspicion of COVID-19 (conditional recommendation, low certainty of evidence).The IDSA panel suggests SARS-CoV-2 RNA testing in asymptomatic individuals without a known exposure to COVID-19 who are undergoing a time-sensitive aerosol generating procedure (e.g., bronchoscopy) when PPE is limited, and testing is available (conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence).

164

For asymptomatic contacts of patients with COVID-19, WHO suggests not using chest imaging for the diagnosis of COVID-19 (Conditional recommendation, based on expert opinion) 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 For symptomatic patients with suspected COVID-19, WHO suggests not using chest imaging for the diagnostic workup of COVID-19 when RT-PCR testing is available with timely results (Conditional recommendation, based on low certainty evidence)For symptomatic patients with suspected COVID-19, WHO suggests using chest imaging for the diagnostic workup of COVID-19 when: (1) RT-PCR testing is not available; (2) RT-PCR testing is available, but results are delayed; and (3) initial RT-PCR testing is negative, but with high clinical of suspicion of COVID-19 (Conditional recommendation, based on low certainty evidence)

5

At minimum, respiratory material should be collected:· upper respiratory specimens: nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swab or wash in ambulatory patients · and/or lower respiratory specimens: sputum (if produced) and/or endotracheal aspirate or bronchoalveolar lavage in patients with more severe respiratory disease. (Note high risk of aerosolization; adhere strictly to infection prevention and control procedures).Additional clinical specimens may be collected as COVID-19 virus has been detected in blood and stool, as had the coronaviruses responsible for SARS and MERSTo consider a case as laboratory-confirmed by NAAT in an area with no COVID-19 virus circulation, one of the following conditions need to be met: · A positive NAAT result for at least two different targets on the COVID-19 virus genome, of which at least one target is preferably specific for COVID-19 virus using a validated assay (as at present no other SARSlike coronaviruses are circulating in the human population it can be debated whether it must be COVID-19 or SARS-like coronavirus specific); OR · One positive NAAT result for the presence of betacoronavirus, and COVID-19 virus further identified by sequencing partial or whole genome of the virus as long as the sequence target is larger or different from the amplicon probed in the NAAT assay used.When there are discordant results, the patient should be resampled and, if appropriate, sequencing of the virus from the original specimen or of an amplicon generated from an appropriate NAAT assay, different from the NAAT assay initially used, should be obtained to provide a reliable test result.In areas where COVID-19 virus is widely spread a simpler algorithm might be adopted in which, for example, screening by rRT-PCR of a single discriminatory target is considered sufficient.One or more negative results do not rule out the possibility of COVID-19 virus infection. A number of factors could lead to a negative result in an infected individual, including: · poor quality of the specimen, containing little patient material (as a control, consider determining whether there is adequate human DNA in the sample by including a human target in the PCR testing). · the specimen was collected late or very early in the infection. · the specimen was not handled and shipped appropriately. technical reasons inherent in the test, e.g. virus mutation or PCR inhibition.If a negative result is obtained from a patient with a high index of suspicion for COVID-19 virus infection, particularly when only upper respiratory tract specimens were collected, additional specimens, including from the lower respiratory tract if possible, should be collected and tested.5 Virus isolation is not recommended as a routine diagnostic procedure. Serological surveys can aid investigation of an ongoing outbreak and retrospective assessment of the attack rate or extent of an outbreak. In cases where NAAT assays are negative and there is a strong epidemiological link to COVID-19 infection, paired serum samples (in the acute and convalescent phase) could support diagnosis once validated serology tests are available. Serum samples can be stored for these purposes.In addition to providing confirmation of the presence of the virus, regular sequencing of a percentage of specimens from clinical cases can be useful to monitor for viral genome mutations that might affect the performance of medical countermeasures, including diagnostic tests. Virus whole genome sequencing can also inform molecular epidemiology studies. Many public-access databases for deposition of genetic sequence data are available, including GISAID, which is intended to protect the rights of the submitting party.Information sources* 7Describe all information sources in the search (e.g., databases with dates of coverage and contact with authors to identify additional sources), as well as the date the most recent search was executed.Search 8Present the full electronic search strategy for at least 1 database, including any limits used, such that it could be repeated.Information sources* 7Describe all information sources in the search (e.g., databases with dates of coverage and contact with authors to identify additional sources), as well as the date the most recent search was executed.Search 8Present the full electronic search strategy for at least 1 database, including any limits used, such that it could be repeated.

24

An indeterminate result on a real-time PCR assay is defined as a late amplification signal in a real-time PCR reaction at a predetermined high cycle threshold value. This may be due to low viral target quantity in the clinical specimen approaching the limit of detection (LOC) of the assay, or may represent nonspecific reactivity (false signal) in the specimen. When clinically relevant, indeterminate samples should be investigated further in the laboratory (e.g. by testing for an alternate gene target using a validated real-time PCR or nucleic acid sequencing that is equally or more sensitive than the initial assay or method used) or by collection and testing of another sample from the patient with initial indeterminate result.

38

In admitted patients with suspected COVID-19, the diagnosis should be first attempted with an upper respiratory specimen, preferably a nasopharyngeal swab. However, a nasal and/or throat swab can be collected as an alternative if nasopharyngeal swabs are not available.For admitted patients with suspected COVID-19, if the upper respiratory swab is negative and there remains a high degree of clinical suspicion a repeat swab should be collected.In severely ill patients whose upper respiratory tract specimen is negative but a COVID-19 diagnosis is still suspected, a lower respiratory tract specimen consisting of sputum, or closed system suctioned endotracheal aspirate should also be collected when possible (e.g., if the patient is producing sputum or they are already ventilated).38 Once a patient has a positive laboratory test, further testing for diagnostic purposes is not necessary (23).38 Serology for COVID-19 is not routinely available at this time. Las pruebas invasivas recomendadas para el diagnóstico de la infección por SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 serán mini lavado bronquial y aspirado traqueal a ciegas con sistema cerrado.(Fuerte a favor)

40

Punto de buena práctica: Se sugiere restringir la broncoscopia y solo realizarla cuando los resultados no son concluyentes, se sospeche un diagnóstico alternativo o se espera que los resultados permiten modificar la conducta. As of March 11, 2020, KSLM and the KCDC recommend a positive result determination only when all the genes are detected, even for tests using different genes from those mentioned in the above two guidelines. This recommendation is based on the opinions of numerous experts who observed nonspecific and weak amplification in the clinical specimens of patients who received final results of COVID-19 as negative.Se recomienda no solicitar exámenes de apoyo en ausencia de alteración de signos vitales o de la oxigenación y sin factores de riesgo.(Fuerte en contra) 40 En pacientes con alteración de signos vitales, de la oxigenación y/o con factores de riesgo, se recomienda la realización de hemograma, Proteína c reactiva, enzimas hepáticas, bilirrubinas, función renal, LDH, CK, troponinas, EKG y dímero D con sospecha de infección o infección confirmada por SARS-CoV-2 para definir criterio de gravedad y definir hospitalización.(Fuerte a favor)Se recomienda solicitar gases arteriales al ingreso al servicio de hospitalización y en el seguimiento del paciente con infección por SARS-CoV-2 en el contexto de índices de oxigenación y score de severidad (CURB 65, qSOFA, SOFA).(Fuerte a favor)Se sugiere que un nivel de LDH > 350 ui/L en paciente con sospecha o infección confirmada por SARS-CoV-2 con factores de riesgo permite definir necesidad de hospitalización (Débil a favor)Se considera que la presencia de anormalidad en el hemograma (Linfocitos < 800, Neutrófilos >10.000, plaquetas < 150.000) linfopenia, neutrofilia o trombocitopenia al ingreso del paciente con sospecha e infección confirmada por SARS-CoV-2 en pacientes con factores de riesgo permite definir hospitalización (Fuerte a favor) In patients presenting with moderate to severe symptoms, CXR, if available, may be useful in addition to clinical judgment to determine whether there is a need for additional assessment in a hospital setting.Se sugiere la realización de TC de tórax simple para la valoración de pacientes con curso clínico no esperado, para detectar complicaciones y se considera que debería implicar cambios en la conducta terapéutica. ( Se recomienda que los pacientes con infección SARSCoV-2/ COVID-19 pueden ser dados de alta y continuar aislamiento en casa si cumplen los siguientes criterios: ► Ausencia de fiebre >48 horas sin antipiréticos y ► Mejoría clínica de los síntomas respiratorios y la hipoxemia y ► No requiere hospitalización por otras patologías y ► Tolerancia a la vía oral (Fuerte a favor)Si no es posible controlar con RT-PCR, se recomienda extender el aislamiento de pacientes infectados con SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 confirmados hasta completar el periodo máximo registrado de diseminación viral de 14 a 28 días, de acuerdo con la gravedad de los síntomas y la resolución de estos. (Débil a favor)Se sugiere, en caso de disponibilidad, mantener el aislamiento de pacientes infectados con SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 hasta la obtención de una (1) Guidance on discharge and ending isolation in the context of widespread community transmission: Hospitalised suspected or confirmed COVID-19 cases: This category refers to: · Patients who are hospitalised with suspected or laboratory confirmed COVID-19 (mild, severe and critically ill) [27] · Confirmed COVID-19 patients discharged early, due to clinical improvement. If testing and hospitalisation capacity allows, · For a clinically recovered patient, two negative RT-PCR tests from respiratory specimens at 24 hours interval at least eight days after onset of symptoms [4] If limited/no testing capacity, · Patient can be discharged based on clinical criteria, per evaluation of the treating physician, AND · the discharged patient should self-isolate at home or in a safe place until resolution of fever for at least three days and clinical improvement of other symptoms AND · until eight days after the onset of symptoms for mild cases or for 14 days (severe cases) if these criteria have not been fulfilled in hospital. · Follow-up visits, or monitoring via phone or other electronic device can be considered. · These patients should be prioritised for testing.Se sugiere realizar pruebas serológicas IgG/IgM siguiendo los patrones de seroconversión conocidos hasta el momento, al menos cada 4 semanas en aquellas personas con resultado inicial negativo y según evaluación individual de riesgo.(Débil a favor)

48

Repetitive testing may be necessary to confirm COVID-19 in suspected cases or PUIs. As the clinical significance of coinfection caused by the causative agent of COVID-19 and other infectious diseases remains unclear, the collection of a sufficient quantity of clinical specimens with proper methods is recommended.As the current knowledge on COVID-19 is limited, it is difficult to rule out infection based on a single negative test result, especially when the test is performed using an upper respiratory tract specimen. Even if the upper respiratory tract specimen tests negative, the collection and testing of lower respiratory tract specimens are strongly recommended, especially in cases of severe or progressive disease 48 The collection of specimens for diagnosis is recommended within seven days of symptom onset.Specimen selection/Patients with severe symptoms, patients with a productive cough, and intubated patients: Lower respiratory tract specimens, such as sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage, and tracheal aspirates, should be collected. If possible, the collection of nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs can be considered.Specimen selection/ Patients referred for additional testing by a physician (e.g., patients who tested negative using nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal swabs, but show an indication of pneumonia): Lower respiratory tract specimens, such as sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage, and tracheal aspirates, should be collected.Criteria for final test interpretation: All kits currently available in Korea can detect two or more genes. According to the interpretation criteria of some manufacturers, detection of only one of multiple genes is interpreted as COVID-19 positive. However, based on results from actual clinical specimens, KSLM recommends a determination of a positive result only when all genes are detected. When only one gene is detected, retesting or consulting the reference laboratory is recommended.Among the reagents with EUA, some kits with three target genes use one target gene for the screening test and the other two target genes for the confirmatory test. For these kits, the confirmatory test result is deemed positive only if both confirmatory genes are detected. If one gene is not detected, the result cannot be interpreted as positive.48 If the upper respiratory tract specimens test negative, lower respiratory tract specimens should be collected and tested.Patient specimens, a positive control, and a negative control should be examined together, and internal controls should be examined and verified together in all reactions.If a patient with an epidemiological correlation and COVID-19 symptoms repeatedly tests negative, the tested specimen should be submitted to the KCDC for further testing.Other specimens: If necessary, additional specimens, such as blood, urine, and feces, may be collected on consultation with the physician taking care of the patient and a laboratory physician. However, the diagnostic value and clinical utility of these specimens remain unclear. The collection of blood specimens may be considered for public health purposes, such as serological surveys 102The IDSA panel suggests against SARS-CoV-2 RNA testing in asymptomatic individuals without a known exposure to COVID-19 who are undergoing a time-sensitive aerosol generating procedure (e.g., bronchoscopy) when PPE is available (conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence).

88

En el caso de que se determine que se cumplen los criterios de realización de test diagnóstico para la detección de infección por SARS-CoV-2 es necesaria la toma de las siguientes muestras: -Tracto respiratorio superior: exudado nasofaríngeo/orofaríngeo. o -Tracto respiratorio inferior: esputo (si es posible) o aspirado endotraqueal, lavado broncoalveolar, o broncoaspirado, especialmente en pacientes con enfermedad respiratoria grave.Si las pruebas iniciales son negativas en un paciente con una alta sospecha clínica y epidemiológica (especialmente cuando solo se han recogido muestras de tracto respiratorio superior o la muestra recogida inicialmente no estaba tomada adecuadamente) se repetirá el diagnóstico con nuevas muestras del tracto respiratorio. Tras la confirmación del caso se enviarán también las siguientes muestras: Dos muestras de suero: la serología es útil para la confirmación de la respuesta a la infección por coronavirus. La primera muestra debe recogerse durante la primera semana del cuadro clínico (fase aguda) y la segunda muestra entre 14-30 días después.Si al paciente es preciso realizarle una radiografía de tórax (con proyecciones postero-anterior y lateral) se utilizará un aparato portátil para evitar traslados. El aparato deberá estar protegido por plásticos desechables y lavado posteriormente con una solución de hipoclorito de sodio al 1% o del desinfectante aprobado para superficies en su centro. The IDSA panel suggests collecting nasopharyngeal, or mid-turbinate, or nasal swabs rather than oropharyngeal swabs or saliva alone for SARS-CoV-2 RNA testing in symptomatic individuals with upper respiratory tract infection (URTI) or influenza like illness (ILI) suspected of having COVID-19 (conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence).La indicación de TC torácico debe individualizarse. La realización de TC tórax de baja dosis para la detección de infección por SARS-CoV-2 puede valorarse, especialmente en las áreas geográficas más afectadas por el COVID-19, y para pacientes con radiografía de tórax normal con elevada sospechosa clínica. 

103

Broncoscopia: La toma de muestras del tracto respiratorio superior (nasofaríngea y orofaríngea) mediante el frotis con hisopo es el método diagnóstico primario y de elección en la infección por COVID-19. It is recommended to use volume CT with a maximum acquisition slice thickness of 5 mm (≥16 slice multi-detector CT) and a reconstruction slice thickness of 1.0 to 1.5 mm [30] . Multi-planar reformats (transverse, sagittal, and coronal planes) are beneficial for the early detection of lesions in patients with negative nucleic acid tests [9] .

114

The indication for bronchoscopy in the case of confirmed or suspected COVID-19 disease should be made very strict and should only be considered if: Diagnostic reason: the nasopharyngeal smear is negative two times and clinically there is still diagnostic uncertainty of COVID-19 infection.If bronchoscopy is performed for diagnostic reason, tracheobronchial lavage using a few milliliters or bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) only is recommended. No other diagnostic procedures such as transbronchial biopsy or needle aspiration should be performed in the same procedure.

159

A chest X-ray is not recommended in individuals presenting with mild symptoms because imaging is often normal2 and this may be falsely reassuring.In a patient with concerning symptoms, when the RTPCR assay is not yet available, a chest radiograph is useful. Although the imaging features of COVID-19 pneumonia are nonspecific, when present, they increase the pretest probability of the patient having the disease. Findings suggestive of an alternative diagnosis (pneumothorax, large pleural effusions, lung mass, etc) that requires treatment are also extremely useful.159 Lung ultrasound should not be used to diagnose or exclude COVID-19 pneumonia.If a patient with an initial negative RT-PCR result returns to the emergency department with worsening symptoms, a chest X-ray may be useful to detect COVID-19 pneumonia and complications. As the number of days increases from initial symptom onset, the chest radiograph has an increased likelihood of being abnormal 159Similar to CXR, CT should only be performed if the results are expected to influence patient management (…) The following is a list of potential indications or clinical scenarios for which CT chest may be warranted ( Figure 5 ). It is not meant to be prescriptive.: a) Detection of Intrathoracic Complications; b) Immunosuppressed or High-Risk Patients With Suspected Respiratory Infection and a Negative Chest Radiograph; c) Initial Negative RT-PCR Result but Ongoing High Clinical Suspicion or Clinical Deterioration After a Normal Chest Radiograph; d)

156

Serologic testing can be o ered as a method to support diagnosis of acute COVID-19 illness for persons who present late.* For persons who present 9-14 days after illness onset, serologic testing can be o ered in addition to recommended direct detection methods such as polymerase chain reaction. This will maximize sensitivity as the sensitivity of nucleic acid detection is decreasing and serologic testing is increasing during this time period. In the case of an initially negative RT-PCR and CT changes highly suggestive of COVID-19, the RT-PCR should be repeated to determine if it had been a false-negative result.

35

An acute COVID-19 infection is diagnosed with a PCR test of a nasopharyngeal sample. The time required to obtain the result may currently take 2 days, but more rapid tests are entering the market.New rapid tests to detect antibodies against coronavirus in the blood are becoming available. They provide the result within a few hours after the sample is taken. These tests cannot be used to diagnose an acute infection, due to the delay between the onset of the infection and the formation of antibodies. Instead, they will provide an answer to the question whether a person has had a COVID-19 infection. 

122

The Panel recommends that a molecular or antigen test for SARS-CoV-2 should be used to diagnose acute SARS-CoV-2 infection (AIII).The Panel Recommends against the use of serologic testing as the sole basis for diagnosis of acute SARS-CoV-2 infection (AIII).The Panel Recommends against the use of serologic testing to determine whether a person is immune toSARS-CoV-2 infection (AIII).

123

De tener un Caso Sospechoso: · Realizar toma de muestra para diagnóstico de COVID-19 mediante: Hisopado nasofaríngeo para detección de SARS-CoV-2 mediante rt-PCR u otra prueba aceptada Broncofibroscopía: este procedimiento genera una gran cantidad de aerosoles por lo que se debe restringir su realización, en caso de necesidad debe realizarse sólo en pacientes con intubación endotraqueal. Sólo podría evaluarse su realización en las siguientes situaciones: · Cuando pruebas menos invasivas son inconclusas para COVID-19 en pacientes con necesidad de confirmación diagnóstica.Ultrasonografía torácica: puede realizarse al ingreso hospitalario y como medio de monitoreo no invasivo de las lesiones pulmonares (al menos cada 48 horas).

125

Diagnósticos consignados en COVID-19: a) Diagnóstico clínico: El cuadro clínico más frecuente está caracterizado por un síndrome gripal, que inicia con fiebre leve, con evolución progresiva de la temperatura, y persistencia entre 3 a 4 días, con un posterior descenso, como ha sido observado en casos de influenza9. El diagnóstico depende de la evaluación clínica-epidemiológica y del examen físico. Se recomienda que en todos los casos con síndrome gripal se pregunte por el antecedente de viaje en el interior y exterior del país, así como contacto cercano con personas que haya viajado, dentro de los 14 días antes del inicio de síntomas. Esta información debe escribirse en la historia clínica para una eventual investigación epidemiológica. Diagnosis of COVID-19: After initial evaluation of patients who meet the criteria for suspect cases, the following diagnostic interventions should be considered: SARS-CoV-2 RNA detection by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR): Can be done in any of the following respiratory specimens: a) Nasopharyngeal swab specimen (preferable as viral RNA levels may be higher in nasal compared with oral specimens). b) Oropharyngeal swab can be collected but is not essential; if collected, it should be placed in the same container as the nasopharyngeal specimen. c) Sputum collected only from patients with productive cough. d) Tracheal aspirate/bronchial washings/bronchoalveolar lavage: Can be evaluated from patients who are admitted in critical care and require intubation. Specimen can also be utilized to diagnose concomitant infection by other viruses/bacteria/fungi.

130

A positive RT-PCR test for SARS-CoV-2 confirms the diagnosis of COVID-19 although falsepositive and false negative tests are possible. If initial testing is negative but the suspicion for COVID-19 is high, it is recommended to resample and analyze specimen from multiple respiratory tract sites as above.Chest CT, low dose non-contrast,may be helpful in making the diagnosis/follow-up and can also reveal presence of complications like ARDS and pleural effusions. No finding can completely rule in or rule out the possibility of COVID-19 pneumonia.140 CT is better than Chest Xray for diagnosis early. Bilateral pneumonia is a common finding of COVID-19 pneumonia 151 QUESTION 3: Is there a place for the thoracic CT scan in a symptomatic patient suspected of Covid-19 or proven? UNCHANGED RECOMMENDATIONS The chest scanner is the only recommended imaging test, to be performed only for moderate to severe respiratory symptoms. The use of a systematic angiogram is not validated. In pauci-symptomatic patients without the need for oxygenation and without risk factors (obesity, hypertension, immunosuppression), there is no place for chest imaging.

131

To provide diagnostic testing for COVID-19, the laboratory should perform RT-PCR testing using confirmatory test approved by the National Health Laboratory.In the current time laboratories should NOT attempt viral isolation and culture from samples collected from patients suspected to have COVID-19. 1. Instrumental diagnostics general: Pulse oximetry with SpO2 measurement for detecting respiratory failure and assessing the severity of hypoxemia is a simple and reliable screening method that allows you to identify patients with hypoxemia who need respiratory support and evaluate its effectiveness 119 2. The use of radiation diagnostic methods is not recommended in the absence of symptoms of a respiratory infection in patients with positive laboratory results for SARS-CoV-2 RNA, as well as in the presence of epidemiological data indicating the possibility of infection.Criteria for Recovery and Discontinuing Isolation: For symptomatic confirmed patients: At least 3 days have passed since recovery (resolution of the fever without using fever reducing medication and respiratory symptom resolution (cough and SOB) AND followed by 2 negative respiratory samples ≥ 24 hours apart.Criteria for Recovery and Discontinuing Isolation: For symptomatic confirmed patients: If PCR test not feasible, resolution of the fever without using fever reducing medication and respiratory symptom resolution for at least 3 days AND at least 10 days have passed since symptom first appeared (exclude HCWs and sever cases from this approach).

129

The serological test options do not play a role in the initial diagnosis, but can be useful as additional information in the later course of the disease and should be further investigated in terms of their significance, e.g. also for epidemiological questions. Thorax computed tomography (CT) is a sensitive diagnostic approach in the early period in PCV test negative COVID-19 patients. Thorax CT is recommended to support the faster triage of these patients.

42

Testing for acute COVID-19 infection should be by means of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays. Samples to be sent are: · Upper respiratory tract samples -A sample from the upper respiratory tract should be sent from all patients. A single site is sufficient. Currently, a nasopharyngeal swab is the preferred specimen, but in patients where this is not possible (e.g. recent nasal surgery, or severe coagulopathy), an oropharyngeal, nasal mid-turbinate, or anterior nares swab can be collected instead. Currently, we do not recommend using antibody-based (serological) tests for the diagnosis of acute COVID-19. These tests are insufficiently sensitive early in the disease course (before sufficient antibodies have been produced).

44

Dessa forma, recomenda-se realizar investigações iniciais e o exame físico para verificar as condições fisiológicas do paciente, de forma a dar o suporte adequado (19, (83) (84) (85) :• avaliação do padrão respiratório: tosse e/ou dispneia; • aferição de temperatura axilar, frequência cardíaca, frequência respiratória e oximetria de pulso; • ausculta pulmonar: presença de estertores inspiratórios ou expiratórios, respiração brônquica ou dificuldade respiratória em pacientes com pneumonia; e • avaliação de sinais de cianose e hipóxia. O paciente com a forma grave da doença requer internação em unidades hospitalares (e UTIs se necessário) com terapia e monitoramento precoces de suporte.Os testes imunológicos para identificação de anticorpos IgM e IgG contra o SARS-CoV-2, aplicados como testes rápidos ou processados em laboratório, não são recomendados para a confirmação diagnóstica de pacientes com sintomas de início recente (há menos de sete dias), mas apenas para finalidade de vigilância por meio de estudos de inquéritos populacionais e também como auxílio diagnóstico (18) .

149

Depending on local epidemiology and clinical symptoms, test for other potential etiologies (e.g. malaria, dengue fever, typhoid fever) as appropriate.For COVID-19 patients with severe or critical disease, also collect blood cultures, ideally prior to initiation of antimicrobial therapy (3).

153

CT is indicated after the clinical evaluation of patients with respiratory symptoms such as dyspnoea and desaturation, the degree of severity justifying investigation being left to clinical judgement and depending on local resources.CT allows evaluation of disease extent at baseline, which may help to predict a poor outcome and the need for ventilation. If supplementary oxygen is needed in patients with limited disease extension, other diagnoses, especially pulmonary embolism, should be suspected and an additional contrastenhanced CT acquisition may be indicated.CT allows for the identification of signs of pulmonary oedema, raising the suspicion of COVID-19 related myocarditis, in which case troponin measurement and echocardiography may be required.

39

Seguimiento post alta de casos: iv. Control a los 7 días de alta con radiografía de tórax, hemograma y exámenes de laboratorio si se mantuvo alguno alterado al alta. De acuerdo con condición del paciente indicar nuevos exámenes en 7 días.

61

Guidance on discharge and ending isolation in the context of widespread community transmission: Immunocompromised patients: Self-isolation should last until all of the following criteria are fulfilled: at least 14 days after symptom onset AND resolution of fever for at least three days AND clinical improvement of symptoms other than fever.Guidance on discharge and ending isolation in the context of widespread community transmission: Mild suspected or confirmed COVID-19 cases: This category refers to: · Confirmed COVID-19 patients never hospitalised due to mild symptoms or asymptomatic presentation · Suspected or probable COVID-19 patients in the community, who adhered to the stay-at-home advice by the national authorities. These patients can end self-isolation eight days after the onset of symptoms AND resolution of fever AND clinical improvement of other symptoms for at least for three days.Guidance on discharge and ending isolation in the context of widespread community transmission: Critical infrastructure responders (e.g. heathcare workers, law enforcement, firefighters etc.). End isolation after resolution of fever for at least three days AND after eight days from the onset of symptoms have passed. Healthcare workers can return to work immediately after that, using a surgical mask during work hours until 14 days after the onset of symptoms have passed*. · If testing capacity allows, for a clinically recovered patient, two negative RT-PCR tests from respiratory specimens at 24 hours interval, at least eight days after onset of symptoms. Critical infrastructure responders, especially HCWs, should be considered a priority group for testing during the pandemic. 

140

Discharge criteria: 1. Resolution of fever without the use of fever-reducing medications e.g paracetamol for at least 3 (three) days and 2. Significant improvement in the respiratory symptoms (e.g., cough, shortness of breath) for 3 days, and 3. After discharge, continue home or facility isolation for the duration which extends from the day of symptom onset to 21th day for hospitalized patients. 4. For severe or critical patients -physician's discretion 149 Criteria for discharging patients from isolation (i.e., discontinuing transmission-based precautions) without requiring retesting: • For symptomatic patients: 10 days after symptom onset, plus at least 3 additional days without symptoms (including without feverii and without respiratory symptoms) • For asymptomatic casesiv: 10 days after positive test for SARS-CoV-2. Countries can choose to continue to use a laboratory testing algorithm as part of the release criteria in (a subset of) infected individuals if their risk assessment gives reason to do so. 84 1.Discharge criteria: 1) Body temperature is back to normal for more than three days; 2) Respiratory symptoms improve obviously; 3) Pulmonary imaging shows obvious absorption of inflammation, 4) Nuclei acid tests negative twice consecutively on respiratory tract samples such as sputum and nasopharyngeal swabs (sampling interval being at least 24 hours). Those who meet the above criteria can be discharged.

174

Consequently, the HCSP recommends the lifting of containment: 1. In the general population: • From the 8th day from the onset of symptoms; • AND at least 48 hours from the disappearance of the fever verified by a rectal temperature below 37.8 ° C (measured with a thermometer twice a day, and in the absence of any antipyretic intake for at least 12 hours) ; • AND at least 48 hours from the disappearance of a possible dyspnea (respiratory rate less than 22 / min at rest); The disappearance of the cough is not a good criterion since an irritant cough may persist beyond healing. Within 7 days of the lifting of containment, it is recommended to avoid close contact with persons at risk of severe form. In case of patients who are deceased, consider autopsy material including lung tissue. In surviving patients, paired serum (acute and convalescent) can be useful to retrospectively define cases as serological assays become available.

69

WHO does not currently recommend the use of antigendetecting rapid diagnostic tests for patient care, although research into their performance and potential diagnostic utility is highly encouraged.WHO does not recommend the use of antibody-detecting rapid diagnostic tests for patient care but encourages the continuation of work to establish their usefulness in disease surveillance and epidemiologic research 42 We do not currently recommend point of care antigen-based tests, due to concerns about poor sensitivity and specificity Provide an explicit statement of the questions and objectives being addressed with reference to their key elements (e.g., population or participants, concepts, and context) or other relevant key elements used to conceptualize the review questions and/or objectives.

Protocol and registration 5

Indicate whether a review protocol exists; state if and where it can be accessed (e.g., a Web address); and if available, provide registration information, including the registration number.3Indicate whether a review protocol exists; state if and where it can be accessed (e.g., a Web address); and if available, provide registration information, including the registration number.3

Eligibility criteria 6

Specify characteristics of the sources of evidence used as eligibility criteria (e.g., years considered, language, and publication status), and provide a rationale.Specify characteristics of the sources of evidence used as eligibility criteria (e.g., years considered, language, and publication status), and provide a rationale.

Appendix 2

Selection of sources of evidence † 9State the process for selecting sources of evidence (i.e., screening and eligibility) included in the scoping review.Selection of sources of evidence † 9State the process for selecting sources of evidence (i.e., screening and eligibility) included in the scoping review.

6

Data charting process ‡ 10Describe the methods of charting data from the included sources of evidence (e.g., calibrated forms or forms that have been tested by the team before their use, and whether data charting was done independently or in duplicate) and any processes for obtaining and confirming data from investigators. Data charting process ‡ 10Describe the methods of charting data from the included sources of evidence (e.g., calibrated forms or forms that have been tested by the team before their use, and whether data charting was done independently or in duplicate) and any processes for obtaining and confirming data from investigators.Data items 11 List and define all variables for which data were sought and any assumptions and simplifications made. 7Critical appraisal of individual sources of evidence §

Summary of evidence 19

Summarize the main results (including an overview of concepts, themes, and types of evidence available), link to the review questions and objectives, and consider the relevance to key groups.Summarize the main results (including an overview of concepts, themes, and types of evidence available), link to the review questions and objectives, and consider the relevance to key groups.

15

Limitations 20 Discuss the limitations of the scoping review process. 15, 16Conclusions 21Provide a general interpretation of the results with respect to the review questions and objectives, as well as potential implications and/or next steps.Limitations 20 Discuss the limitations of the scoping review process. 15, 16

Funding 22

Describe sources of funding for the included sources of evidence, as well as sources of funding for the scoping review. Describe the role of the funders of the scoping review.2 JBI = Joanna Briggs Institute; PRISMA-ScR = Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews. * Where sources of evidence (see second footnote) are compiled from, such as bibliographic databases, social media platforms, and Web sites. † A more inclusive/heterogeneous term used to account for the different types of evidence or data sources (e.g., quantitative and/or qualitative research, expert opinion, and policy documents) that may be eligible in a scoping review as opposed to only studies. This is not to be confused with information sources (see first footnote). ‡ The frameworks by Arksey and O'Malley (6) and Levac and colleagues (7) and the JBI guidance (4, 5) refer to the process of data extraction in a scoping review as data charting. § The process of systematically examining research evidence to assess its validity, results, and relevance before using it to inform a decision. This term is used for items 12 and 19 instead of "risk of bias" (which is more applicable to systematic reviews of interventions) to include and acknowledge the various sources of evidence that may be used in a scoping review (e.g., quantitative and/or qualitative research, expert opinion, and policy document). (covid-19) ) OR (tw:(2019 ncov)) OR (tw:(novel coronavirus)) OR (tw:(new coronavirus)) OR (tw:(wuhan OR "2019")) OR (tw:(wuhan AND coronavirus)))))) AND (tw:((tw:(guideline OR guidelines OR recommendati* OR consensus development OR critical pathways ))))) AND ( type_of_study:("guideline")) 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58 Recomendaciones de consenso SEPAR y AEER sobre el uso de la broncoscopia y la toma de muestras de la vía respiratoria en pacientes con sospecha o con infección confirmada por COVID-19 (93) (118) 2. Appropriate scenarios for use of COVID-19 Ag-RDTs include the following: ii) To support outbreak investigations (e.g. in closed or semi-closed groups including schools, care-homes, cruise ships, prisons, work-places and dormitories, etc.) In NAAT-confirmed COVID-19 outbreaks, Ag-RDTs could be used to screen at-risk individuals and rapidly isolate positive cases (and initiate other contact tracing efforts) and prioritize sample collection from RDT-negative individuals for NAAT. 226 (118) 2. Appropriate scenarios for use of COVID-19 Ag-RDTs include the following: v) Testing of asymptomatic contacts of cases may be considered even if the Ag-RDT is not specifically authorized for this use, since asymptomatic cases have been demonstrated to have viral loads similar to symptomatic cases (17), though in that situation, a negative Ag-RDT should not remove a contact from quarantine requirements. 164 (111) For asymptomatic contacts of patients with COVID-19, WHO suggests not using chest imaging for the diagnosis of COVID-19 (Conditional recommendation, based on expert opinion) 255 (120) Rapid antigen tests perform best when the person is tested in the early stages of infection with SARS-CoV-2 when viral load is generally highest. They also may be informative in diagnostic testing situations in which the person has a known exposure to a con rmed case of COVID-19.Describe sources of funding for the included sources of evidence, as well as sources of funding for the scoping review. Describe the role of the funders of the scoping review.2 JBI = Joanna Briggs Institute; PRISMA-ScR = Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews. * Where sources of evidence (see second footnote) are compiled from, such as bibliographic databases, social media platforms, and Web sites. † A more inclusive/heterogeneous term used to account for the different types of evidence or data sources (e.g., quantitative and/or qualitative research, expert opinion, and policy documents) that may be eligible in a scoping review as opposed to only studies. This is not to be confused with information sources (see first footnote). ‡ The frameworks by Arksey and O'Malley (6) and Levac and colleagues (7) and the JBI guidance (4, 5) refer to the process of data extraction in a scoping review as data charting. § The process of systematically examining research evidence to assess its validity, results, and relevance before using it to inform a decision. This term is used for items 12 and 19 instead of "risk of bias" (which is more applicable to systematic reviews of interventions) to include and acknowledge the various sources of evidence that may be used in a scoping review (e.g., quantitative and/or qualitative research, expert opinion, and policy document). 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60 

(78)

Based on an assessment by a physician responsible for communicable diseases, a sample for COVID-19testing may be taken also from asymptomatic persons with exposure to COVID-19 and in situations associated with increased transmission risk or where the risk of the disease spreading is high and/orthe consequences of the infections would be serious. 98 (91) COVID-19 testing is indicated in patients incidentally found to have findings suggestive of COVID-19 on a CT scan 98 (91) Imaging is not routinely indicated as a screening test for COVID-19 in asymptomatic individuals 91 (90) In the course of an epidemic, mass serological testing with rapid tests "on request", especially for detecting IgM class antibodies, can be used to identify asymptomatic infections once other means of reducing the epidemic have been exhausted.

(82)

Se sugiere realizar pruebas serológicas IgG/IgM a personas asintomáticas con historia de contacto estrecho con casos sospechosos o confirmados de COVID 19, como mecanismo de gestión de riesgo, al cumplir los 14 días de aislamiento o cuarentena, donde estas se encuentren disponibles. (Débil a favor) 102 (92) The IDSA panel recommends direct SARS-CoV-2 RNA testing in asymptomatic individuals with no known contact with COVID-19 who are being hospitalized in areas with a high prevalence of COVID-19 in the community (i.e., hotspots) (conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence). 102 (92) The IDSA panel suggests against SARS-CoV-2 RNA testing in asymptomatic individuals with no known contact with COVID-19 who are being hospitalized in areas with a low prevalence of COVID-19 in the community (conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence). 102 (92) The IDSA panel suggests SARS-CoV-2 RNA testing in asymptomatic individuals who are either known or suspected to have been exposed to COVID-19 (conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence).Se recomienda en personas con contacto estrecho noprotegido que presenten síntomas durante los 14 días iniciales de aislamiento, realizar algoritmo diagnóstico (RT PCR o serología IgG/IgM). Si esta es positiva debe ir a 14 días más de aislamiento si presenta síntomas leves o 28 días si presenta síntomas moderados a severos. Si es negativa se descarta caso.(Fuerte a favor) 102 (92) The IDSA panel recommends a SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) in symptomatic individuals in the community suspected of having COVID-19, even when the clinical suspicion for COVID-19 is low (strong recommendation, very low certainty of evidence). 153 (108) CT should not be performed as a screening test in patients with mild or no symptoms. 159 (110) Computed tomography should not be used to routinely screen patients for possible COVID-19.Se sugiere realizar pruebas serológicas IgG/IgM siguiendo los patrones de seroconversión conocidos hasta el momento, al menos cada 4 semanas en aquellas personas con resultado inicial negativo y según evaluación individual de riesgo.(Débil a favor) 102 (92) The IDSA panel suggests against SARS-CoV-2 RNA testing in asymptomatic individuals without a known exposure to COVID-19 who are undergoing a time-sensitive aerosol generating procedure (e.g., bronchoscopy) when PPE is available (conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence). 102 (92) The IDSA panel suggests SARS-CoV-2 RNA testing in asymptomatic individuals without a known exposure to COVID-19 who are undergoing a time-sensitive aerosol generating procedure (e.g., bronchoscopy) when PPE is limited, and testing is available (conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence).

Government agencies

48 (85) COVID-19 real-time RT-PCR may be performed for the purposes of: Screening asymptomatic individuals in close contact with confirmed COVID-19 patients 48 (85) Specimen selection/ Asymptomatic or mild patients: The collection of both nasopharyngeal swabs and oropharyngeal swabs is recommended; these should be placed together in the same viral transport medium (VTM) to increase the sensitivity [14, 19] . However, the currently available VTM-swab systems are often designed for one swab. Therefore, specimen packaging and shipping should be conducted carefully, as there is a risk of leakage during transportation. When collecting only one specimen, a nasopharyngeal swab is recommended first. It may be necessary to collect lower respiratory tract specimens, such as sputum; however, sputum induction is not indicated. Appropriate scenarios for use of COVID-19 Ag-RDTs include the following: iv) Where there is widespread community transmission, RDTs may be used for early detection and isolation of positive cases in health facilities, COVID-19 testing centres/sites, care homes, prisons, schools, front-line and health-care workers and for contact tracing. Note that the safe management of patients with RDT-negative samples will depend on the RDT performance and the community prevalence of COVID-19 (see Annex). A negative Ag-RDT result cannot completely exclude an active COVID-19 infection, and, therefore, repeat testing or preferably confirmatory testing (NAAT) should be performed whenever possible ( Figure  1) , particularly in symptomatic patients.119 (97) 6. Intravenous contrast enhancement at CT in patients with known / suspected viral (COVID-19) pneumonia is carried out with suspicion of diseases and pathological conditions, the diagnosis of which is impossible without the use of contrast media (PE, cancer, etc.). A sudden increase in the concentration of D-dimer in blood tests and clinical suspicion of PE are important criteria for performing CT angiopulmonography, provided that its positive result may have an impact on treatment and patient management. 119 (97) 9. Assessment of the dynamics of the course of identified pneumonia COVID-19 is carried out according to clinical indications using the following imaging methods: -optimal: performing CT examination of the lungs according to the standard protocol without intravenous contrast enhancement; -Possibly: RG in two projections in the X-ray room;possible: performing ultrasound of the lungs (as an additional study) if it is impossible to assess the dynamics using CT and RG, subject to the availability of initial information about the true volume and cause of lung damage and trained medical personnel. 173 (112) in cases of clinical deterioration, CT imaging is recommended to assess COVID-19 progression, secondary cardiopulmonary abnormalities such as pulmonary embolism or bacterial pneumonia attached to it, or heart failure secondary to possible COVID-19 myocardial damage

(80)

Screening and triage to screen and isolate all patients with suspected COVID-19 at the firstpoint of contact with the health care system (such as the emergency department oroutpatient department/clinic). Consider COVID-19 as a possible etiology in patientspresenting with acute respiratory illness and place all patients suspected to have COVID-19under Droplet and Contact Precautions, with the addition of Airborne Precautions ifperforming any aerosolgenerating medical procedures. Triage patients using standardizedtriage tools and manage initial presentations accordingly. (109) Serologic testing should be offered as a method to help establish a diagnosis when patients present with late complications of COVID-19 illness, such as multisystem in ammatory syndrome in children. 164 (111) For symptomatic patients with suspected COVID-19, WHO suggests not using chest imaging for the diagnostic workup of COVID-19 when RT-PCR testing is available with timely results (Conditional recommendation, based on low certainty evidence) 164 (111) For symptomatic patients with suspected COVID-19, WHO suggests using chest imaging for the diagnostic workup of COVID-19 when: (1) RT-PCR testing is not available; (2) RT-PCR testing is available, but results are delayed; and (3) initial RT-PCR testing is negative, but with high clinical of suspicion of COVID-19 (Conditional recommendation, based on low certainty evidence) 226 (118) 1. SARS-CoV-2 Ag-RDTs that meet the minimum performance requirements of ≥80% sensitivity and ≥97% specificity compared to a NAAT reference assay1 can be used to diagnose SARS-CoV-2 infection in a range of settings where NAAT is unavailable or where prolonged turnaround times preclude clinical utility. To optimize performance, testing with Ag-RDTs should be conducted by trained operators in strict accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and within the first 5-7 days following the onset of symptoms. 229 (77) At this time, WHO does not recommend the use of saliva as the sole specimen type for routine clinical diagnostics. If nonstandard collection methods are intended to be used to diagnose other respiratory pathogens, the detection of these pathogens needs to be part of the validation procedure. 229 (77)

WHO-CDCs

Careful interpretation of weak positive NAAT results is needed, as some of the assays have shown to produce false signals at high Ct values. When test results turn out to be invalid or questionable, the patient should be resampled and retested. If additional samples from the patient are not available, RNA should be re-extracted from the original samples and retested by highly experienced staff. Results can be confirmed by an alternative NAAT test or via virus sequencing if the viral load is sufficiently high.69 (87) WHO does not currently recommend the use of antigendetecting rapid diagnostic tests for patient care, although research into their performance and potential diagnostic utility is highly encouraged. 69 (87) WHO does not recommend the use of antibody-detecting rapid diagnostic tests for patient care but encourages the continuation of work to establish their usefulness in disease surveillance and epidemiologic research 226 (118) 2. Appropriate scenarios for use of COVID-19 Ag-RDTs include the following: i) To respond to suspected outbreaks of COVID-19 in remote settings, institutions and semi-closed communities where NAAT is not immediately available. Positive Ag-RDT results from multiple suspects is highly suggestive of a COVID-19 outbreak and would allow for early implementation of infection control measures. Where possible, all samples giving positive Ag-RDT results (or at least a subset) should be transported to laboratories with NAAT capability for confirmatory testing. 226 (118) 2. Appropriate scenarios for use of COVID-19 Ag-RDTs include the following: iii) To monitor trends in disease incidence in communities, and particularly among essential workers and health workers during outbreaks or in regions of widespread community transmission where the positive predictive value and negative predictive value of an Ag-RDT result is sufficient to enable effective infection control.2 226 (118) 5. Use of Ag-RDTs is not recommended in settings or populations with low expected prevalence of disease (e.g.screening at points of entry, blood donation, elective surgery), especially where confirmatory testing by NAAT is not readily available. Such use will not be possible until there are more data from high-quality studies confirming high specificity (>99%) of one or more of the commercialized Ag-RDT test kits. 226 (118) Situations where SARS-CoV-2 Ag-RDTs should not be used, based on currently available information: In individuals without symptoms unless the person is a contact of a confirmed case; Where there are zero or only sporadic cases; Appropriate biosafety and infection prevention and control measures (IPC) are lacking; Management of the patient does not change based on the result of the test; For airport or border screening at points of entry; In screening prior to blood donation 229 (77) Serological assays that detect antibodies produced by the human body in response to infection with the SARS-CoV-2 can be useful in various settings. For example, serosurveillance studies can be used to support the investigation of an ongoing outbreak and to support the retrospective assessment of the attack rate or the size of an outbreak 255 (120) Rapid antigen tests can be used for screening testing in high-risk congregate settings in which repeat testing could quickly identify persons with a SARS-CoV-2 infection to inform infection prevention and control measures, thus preventing transmission. In this case, there may be value in providing immediate results with antigen tests even though they may have lower sensitivity than RT-PCR tests, especially in settings where a rapid turnaround time is required.

(77)

From the second week after symptom onset and onwards, NAAT can be considered for faecal specimens in cases where URT and LRT are negative and the clinical suspicion of a COVID-19 infection remains [126] . When testing faeces, ensure that the intended extraction method and NAAT has been validated for this type of sample. 229 (77)If negative NAAT results are obtained from a patient in whom SARS-CoV-2 infection is strongly suspected, a paired serum specimen could be collected. One specimen taken in the acute phase and one in the convalescent phase 2-4 weeks later can be used to look for seroconversion or a rise in antibody titres. These two samples can be used retrospectively to determine whether the individual has had COVID-19, especially when the infection could not be detected using NAAT. 229 (77)One or more negative results do not necessarily rule out the SARS-CoV-2 infection [40, 42, 58, 66-74]. A number of factors could lead to a negative result in an infected individual, including: -poor quality of the specimen, because it contains too little patient material; -the specimen was collected late in the course of the disease, or the specimen was taken from a body compartment that did not contain the virus at that given time; -the specimen was not handled and/or shipped appropriately; -technical reasons inherent in the test, e.g. PCR inhibition or virus mutation.Serology should not be used as a standalone diagnostic to identify acute cases in clinical care or for contact tracing purposes. Interpretations should be made by an expert and are dependent on several factors including the timing of the disease, clinical morbidity, the epidemiology and prevalence within the setting, the type of test used, the validation method, and the reliability of the results.Specimens to be collected: The optimal specimen depends on clinical presentation and time since symptom onset. At minimum, respiratory specimens should be collected.The decision to test should be based on both clinical and epidemiological factors. See the interim guidance clinical management of COVID-19 [99], investigations of clusters [6] and public health surveillance [7] .Virus isolation is not recommended as a routine diagnostic procedure. All procedures involving viral isolation in cell culture require trained staff and BSL-3 facilities. A thorough risk assessment should be carried out when culturing specimens from potential SARS-CoV-2 patients for other respiratory viruses because SARS-CoV-2 has been shown to grow on a variety of cell lines [183] .Virus neutralization assays are considered to be the gold standard test for detecting the presence of functional antibodies. These tests require highly skilled staff and BSL-3 culture facilities and, therefore, are unsuitable for use in routine diagnostic testing.When performance is acceptable, antigen RDTs could be implemented in a diagnostic algorithm to reduce the number of molecular tests that need to be performed and to support rapid identification and management of COVID-19 cases. How antigen detection would be incorporated into the testing algorithm depends on the sensitivity and specificity of the antigen test and on the prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 infection in the intended testing population. Higher viral loads are associated with improved antigen test performance; therefore test performance is expected to be best around symptom onset and in the initial phase of a SARS-CoV-2 infection. 229 (77) Wherever possible, suspected active SARS-CoV-2 infections should be tested with NAAT, such as rRT-PCR. NAAT assays should target the SARS-CoV-2 genome. Since there is currently no known circulation of SARS-CoV-1 globally, a sarbecovirus-specific sequence is also a reasonable target. For commercial assays, interpretation of results should be done according to the instructions for use. Optimal diagnostics consist of a NAAT assay with at least two independent targets on the SARS-CoV-2 genome, however, in areas with widespread transmission of SARS-CoV-2, a simple algorithm might be adopted with one single discriminatory target. 255 (120) Antigen tests are immunoassays that detect the presence of a speci c viral antigen, which implies current viral infection.Antigen tests are currently authorized to be performed on nasopharyngeal or nasal swab specimens placed directly into Table 2 for additional information about antigen tests. Las pruebas invasivas recomendadas para el diagnóstico de la infección por SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 serán mini lavado bronquial y aspirado traqueal a ciegas con sistema cerrado. Se recomienda la realización de una segunda prueba de RT-PCR a las 48 horas (según disponibilidad), en pacientes con la primera prueba negativa con alta sospecha de neumonía por SARS Cov2 / COVID-19 (Fuerte a favor) 40 (82) Se recomienda no usar el uso del esputo inducido por el alto riesgo de formación de aerosoles (Fuerte en contra) 91 (90) 5. Clinical image: 5.1. Asymptomatic or mild type: Imaging: · not necessary 91 (90) 5. Imaging is not indicated for patients with mild features of COVID-19 unless they are at risk for disease progression (Scenario 1) 102 (92) The IDSA panel suggests a strategy of initially obtaining an upper respiratory tract sample (e.g., nasopharyngeal swab) rather than a lower respiratory sample for SARS-CoV-2 RNA testing in hospitalized patients with suspected COVID-19 lower respiratory tract infection. If the initial upper respiratory sample result is negative, and the suspicion for disease remains high, the IDSA panel suggests collecting a lower respiratory tract sample (e.g., sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, tracheal aspirate) rather than collecting another upper respiratory sample (conditional recommendations, very low certainty of evidence). 102 (92) The IDSA panel suggests collecting nasopharyngeal, or mid-turbinate, or nasal swabs rather than oropharyngeal swabs or saliva alone for SARS-CoV-2 RNA testing in symptomatic individuals with upper respiratory tract infection (URTI) or influenza like illness (ILI) suspected of having COVID-19 (conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence). 102 (92) The IDSA panel suggests performing a single viral RNA test and not repeating testing in symptomatic individuals with a low clinical suspicion of COVID-19 (conditional recommendation, low certainty of evidence). 102 (92) The (93) Broncoscopia: La toma de muestras del tracto respiratorio superior (nasofaríngea y orofaríngea) mediante el frotis con hisopo es el método diagnóstico primario y de elección en la infección por COVID-19. 103 (93) Broncoscopia: Si finalmente se precisa broncoscopia para la toma de muestras de COVID-19, se tomarán al menos 2-3 mL de un BAS o un mini-BAL con o sin catéter telescopado, mejor que un BAL reglado, debido al alto riesgo para el personal sanitario. 103 (93) Broncoscopia: Solamente si resultan negativas 2 muestras y persiste la sospecha clínica se tomarán las muestras del tracto respiratorio inferior para COVID-19 por RT-PCR y tinciones/cultivos bacterianos (esputo expectorado, aspirado endotraqueal [BAS] o lavado broncoalveolar [BAL] no reglado)7. 103 (93) Broncoscopia: No se recomienda el esputo inducido por el mayor riesgo de transmisión de aerosoles. 104 (94) 2. In patients suspected of having COVID-19 infection, we suggest that a nasopharyngeal specimen be obtained first. In the setting of severe or progressive disease requiring intubation, if additional specimen is needed to establish a diagnosis of COVID-19 or other diagnosis that will change clinical management, lower respiratory specimens from endotracheal aspirate or bronchoscopy with Q11 bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) can be performed (Ungraded Consensus-Based Statement). 113 (95) Chest CT is the most valuable imaging tool for the clinical diagnosis of early stage COVID-19 pneumonia when patients' symptoms are aspecific, especially in Wuhan with insufficient PCR tests in the early pandemic period 113 (95) Chest X-ray examination is convenient and fast, and has been proven effective in diagnosing other coronaviruses, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) [23] [24] [25] [26] . However, the sensitivity and specificity for mild type patients are relatively low [27] . It is not recommended for patients with early COVID-19 stage. 113 (95) It is recommended to use volume CT with a maximum acquisition slice thickness of 5 mm (≥16 slice multi-detector CT) and a reconstruction slice thickness of 1.0 to 1.5 mm [30] . Multi-planar reformats (transverse, sagittal, and coronal planes) are beneficial for the early detection of lesions in patients with negative nucleic acid tests [9] . 114 (96) If bronchoscopy is performed for diagnostic reason, tracheobronchial lavage using a few milliliters or bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) only is recommended. No other diagnostic procedures such as transbronchial biopsy or needle aspiration should be performed in the same procedure. 114 (96) The indication for bronchoscopy in the case of confirmed or suspected COVID-19 disease should be made very strict and should only be considered if: Diagnostic reason: the nasopharyngeal smear is negative two times and clinically there is still diagnostic uncertainty of COVID-19 infection. 123 (100) Broncofibroscopía: este procedimiento genera una gran cantidad de aerosoles por lo que se debe restringir su realización, en caso de necesidad debe realizarse sólo en pacientes con intubación endotraqueal. Sólo podría evaluarse su realización en las siguientes situaciones: · Cuando pruebas menos invasivas son inconclusas para COVID-19 en pacientes con necesidad de confirmación diagnóstica. 123 (100) De tener un Caso Sospechoso: · Realizar toma de muestra para diagnóstico de COVID-19 mediante: Hisopado nasofaríngeo para detección de SARS-CoV-2 mediante rt-PCR u otra prueba aceptada 123 (100) (84) Os testes imunológicos para identificação de anticorpos IgM e IgG contra o SARS-CoV-2, aplicados como testes rápidos ou processados em laboratório, não são recomendados para a confirmação diagnóstica de pacientes com sintomas de início recente (há menos de sete dias), mas apenas para finalidade de vigilância por meio de estudos de inquéritos populacionais e também como auxílio diagnóstico (18) . 44 (84) Testes diagnósticos: O teste recomendado para o diagnóstico laboratorial de COVID-19 é o teste PCR (Polymerase Chain Reaction), que amplifica sequências de RNA do vírus, possibilitando sua identificação 48 (85) Among the reagents with EUA, some kits with three target genes use one target gene for the screening test and the other two target genes for the confirmatory test. For these kits, the confirmatory test result is deemed positive only if both confirmatory genes are detected. If one gene is not detected, the result cannot be interpreted as positive. 48 (85) As of March 11, 2020, KSLM and the KCDC recommend a positive result determination only when all the genes are detected, even for tests using different genes from those mentioned in the above two guidelines. This recommendation is based on the opinions of numerous experts who observed nonspecific and weak amplification in the clinical specimens of patients who received final results of COVID-19 as negative. 48 (85) As the current knowledge on COVID-19 is limited, it is difficult to rule out infection based on a single negative test result, especially when the test is performed using an upper respiratory tract specimen. Even if the upper respiratory tract specimen tests negative, the collection and testing of lower respiratory tract specimens are strongly recommended, especially in cases of severe or progressive disease 48 (85) COVID-19 real-time RT-PCR may be performed for the purposes of: Confirming cases of suspected COVID-19 48 (85) COVID-19 real-time RT-PCR may be performed for the purposes of: Differential diagnosis of cases with unknown respiratory syndromes 48 (85) Criteria for final test interpretation: All kits currently available in Korea can detect two or more genes. According to the interpretation criteria of some manufacturers, detection of only one of multiple genes is interpreted as COVID-19 positive. However, based on results from actual clinical specimens, KSLM recommends a determination of a positive result only when all genes are detected. When only one gene is detected, retesting or consulting the reference laboratory is recommended. 48 (85) If a patient with an epidemiological correlation and COVID-19 symptoms repeatedly tests negative, the tested specimen should be submitted to the KCDC for further testing. 48 (85) If the upper respiratory tract specimens test negative, lower respiratory tract specimens should be collected and tested. 48 (85) Patient specimens, a positive control, and a negative control should be examined together, and internal controls should be examined and verified together in all reactions. 

(85)

Repetitive testing may be necessary to confirm COVID-19 in suspected cases or PUIs. As the clinical significance of coinfection caused by the causative agent of COVID-19 and other infectious diseases remains unclear, the collection of a sufficient quantity of clinical specimens with proper methods is recommended. 48 (85) Specimen selection/ Patients referred for additional testing by a physician (e.g., patients who tested negative using nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal swabs, but show an indication of pneumonia): Lower respiratory tract specimens, such as sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage, and tracheal aspirates, should be collected. 48 (85) Specimen selection/Patients with severe symptoms, patients with a productive cough, and intubated patients: Lower respiratory tract specimens, such as sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage, and tracheal aspirates, should be collected. If possible, the collection of nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs can be considered. 48 (85) The collection of specimens for diagnosis is recommended within seven days of symptom onset. 84 (88) Novel coronavirus nucleic acid can be detected in nasopharyngeal swabs, sputum, lower respiratory tract secretions, blood, feces and other specimens using RT-PCR and/or NGS methods. It is more accurate if specimens are obtained from lower respiratory tract (sputum or air tract extraction). The specimens should be submitted for testing as soon as possible after collection 88 (89) En el caso de que se determine que se cumplen los criterios de realización de test diagnóstico para la detección de infección por SARS-CoV-2 es necesaria la toma de las siguientes muestras: -Tracto respiratorio superior: exudado nasofaríngeo/orofaríngeo. o -Tracto respiratorio inferior: esputo (si es posible) o aspirado endotraqueal, lavado broncoalveolar, o broncoaspirado, especialmente en pacientes con enfermedad respiratoria grave. 88 (89) La indicación de TC torácico debe individualizarse. La realización de TC tórax de baja dosis para la detección de infección por SARS-CoV-2 puede valorarse, especialmente en las áreas geográficas más afectadas por el COVID-19, y para pacientes con radiografía de tórax normal con elevada sospechosa clínica. 88 (89) Si al paciente es preciso realizarle una radiografía de tórax (con proyecciones postero-anterior y lateral) se utilizará un aparato portátil para evitar traslados. El aparato deberá estar protegido por plásticos desechables y lavado posteriormente con una solución de hipoclorito de sodio al 1% o del desinfectante aprobado para superficies en su centro. 88 (89) Si las pruebas iniciales son negativas en un paciente con una alta sospecha clínica y epidemiológica (especialmente cuando solo se han recogido muestras de tracto respiratorio superior o la muestra recogida inicialmente no estaba tomada adecuadamente) se repetirá el diagnóstico con nuevas muestras del tracto respiratorio. 88 (89) Tras la confirmación del caso se enviarán también las siguientes muestras: Dos muestras de suero: la serología es útil para la confirmación de la respuesta a la infección por coronavirus. La primera muestra debe recogerse durante la primera semana del cuadro clínico (fase aguda) y la segunda muestra entre 14- 30 (101) Diagnósticos consignados en COVID-19: a) Diagnóstico clínico: El cuadro clínico más frecuente está caracterizado por un síndrome gripal, que inicia con fiebre leve, con evolución progresiva de la temperatura, y persistencia entre 3 a 4 días, con un posterior descenso, como ha sido observado en casos de influenza9. El diagnóstico depende de la evaluación clínica-epidemiológica y del examen físico. Se recomienda que en todos los casos con síndrome gripal se pregunte por el antecedente de viaje en el interior y exterior del país, así como contacto cercano con personas que haya viajado, dentro de los 14 días antes del inicio de síntomas. Esta información debe escribirse en la historia clínica para una eventual investigación epidemiológica. 125 (101) The Panel recommends that a molecular or antigen test for SARS-CoV-2 should be used to diagnose acute SARS-CoV-2 infection (AIII). 222 (80) Collect specimens for COVID-19 testing as recommended by your local or provincial public health laboratory. 222 (80) SARS-CoV-2 antibody tests are not recommended for diagnosis of current SARS-CoV-2infection, but they may be useful in post-infectious syndromes. 231 (104) A single positive PCR test is sufficient proof of COVID-19 infection. Repeat "confirmatory" PCR testing on asymptomatic patients who test positive is not indicated, as PCR-based tests have excellent specificity, and asymptomatic and presymptomatic COVID-19 patients are now well described26. 231 (104) Clinical specimens should be collected as soon as possible after onset of symptoms, ideally within 7 days. If a patient presents ≥7 days from symptom onset and is still symptomatic, respiratory samples should be collected.Other specimens: If necessary, additional specimens, such as blood, urine, and feces, may be collected on consultation with the physician taking care of the patient and a laboratory physician. However, the diagnostic value and clinical utility of these specimens remain unclear. The collection of blood specimens may be considered for public health purposes, such as serological surveys Testing for antibodies to the SARS-Cov-2 virus is recommended for use in the following cases: -as an additional method for diagnosing an acute infection (taking into account the seronegative period) or when it is impossible to study smears by the method of amplification of nucleic acids, including during hospitalization in a hospital for somatic pathology; -to identify individuals with an asymptomatic form of infection; -to establish the fact of a previous infection when examining risk groups and conducting a mass survey of the population to assess the level of population immunity; -for the selection of potential donors of immunocompetent plasma. 215 (99)The Panel Recommends against the use of serologic testing to determine whether a person is immune toSARS-CoV-2 infection (AIII). 232 (83) We do not currently recommend point of care antigen-based tests, due to concerns about poor sensitivity and specificity Provide a structured summary that includes (as applicable): background, objectives, eligibility criteria, sources of evidence, charting methods, results, and conclusions that relate to the review questions and objectives.

(104)

Currently, we do not recommend using antibody-based (serological) tests for the diagnosis of acute COVID-19. 231 (104) From the moment that COVID-19 is considered as a diagnostic possibility, persons under investigation should be isolated, and infection control measures should be implemented. Specimens should be collected and transported urgently (same day as collection) for SARS-CoV-2 testing. 231 (104) If a high clinical suspicion for COVID-19 persists despite an initial negative test, repeat testing should be considered in consultation with an infectious diseases expert, particularly in hospitalised patients for whom management might be significantly altered. However, it is equally important to maintain a broad differential diagnosis and to always consider alternative diagnoses26. 231 (104) Lower respiratory tract samples are the preferred specimen type because the lower respiratory tract is the primary site of infection and they are likely to contain the highest viral loads (based on experience with MERS-CoV) and therefore have a better yield. For severe cases, collection of both lower and upper airway specimens for SARS-CoV-2 testing is recommended. Testing for SARS-CoV-2 is performed using any one of several in-house and commercial PCR assays to test for the presence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA30,31. Testing for SARS-CoV-2 must be performed in appropriately equipped laboratories by staff trained in the relevant technical and safety procedures. Initial processing of specimens (before inactivation) should be done in a biological safety cabinet. Molecular testing should be conducted in a BSL-2 laboratory. 231 (104) Viral culture and isolation should only be performed by properly trained and competent personnel in a BSL-3 laboratory.Appropriate PPE must be worn by all laboratory personnel handling SARS-CoV-2 specimens. 232 (83) Currently, we do not recommend using antibody-based (serological) tests for the diagnosis of acute COVID-19. These tests are insufficiently sensitive early in the disease course (before sufficient antibodies have been produced). 232 (83) For (117) As the role of co-infections is not yet clearly understood, identification of a conventional respiratory pathogen does not rule out SARS-CoV-2 infection. 231 (117) Patients with severe illness should also undergo routinely available laboratory tests as clinically indicated according to the clinical guidance above and local management guidelines for community-acquired pneumonia to determine the presence of other potential primary aetiologies of pneumonia (e.g Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57 Se considera que la presencia de anormalidad en el hemograma (Linfocitos < 800, Neutrófilos >10.000, plaquetas < 150.000) linfopenia, neutrofilia o trombocitopenia al ingreso del paciente con sospecha e infección confirmada por SARS-CoV-2 en pacientes con factores de riesgo permite definir hospitalización (Fuerte a favor) 40 (82) Se considera que la presencia de anormalidad en la función renal al ingreso del paciente con sospecha e infección confirmada por SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 que tengan factores de riesgo permite definir hospitalización. Se sugiere que un nivel de LDH > 350 ui/L en paciente con sospecha o infección confirmada por SARS-CoV-2 con factores de riesgo permite definir necesidad de hospitalización (Débil a favor) 91 (90) 5. Clinical image: 5.3. Patient with respiratory failure, clinically unstable: Imaging:Lung X-ray is the basis for identification of lung lesions and can be performed with the use of portable devices. 91 (90) 5. Clinical image: 5.1. Asymptomatic or mild type: Imaging: in case of persistent coughing and/or symptoms indicating lung occupation, a routine lung X-ray or lung CT scan is advised. 91 (90) 5. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57 (108) CT allows for the identification of signs of pulmonary oedema, raising the suspicion of COVID-19 related myocarditis, in which case troponin measurement and echocardiography may be required. 153 (108) CT is indicated after the clinical evaluation of patients with respiratory symptoms such as dyspnoea and desaturation, the degree of severity justifying investigation being left to clinical judgement and depending on local resources. 159 (110) If a patient with an initial negative RT-PCR result returns to the emergency department with worsening symptoms, a chest X-ray may be useful to detect COVID-19 pneumonia and complications. As the number of days increases from initial symptom onset, the chest radiograph has an increased likelihood of being abnormal 159 (110) In patients presenting with moderate to severe symptoms, CXR, if available, may be useful in addition to clinical judgment to determine whether there is a need for additional assessment in a hospital setting. 159 (110) Similar to CXR, CT should only be performed if the results are expected to influence patient management (…) The following is a list of potential indications or clinical scenarios for which CT chest may be warranted ( Figure 5) It is recommended to conduct radiation examination for patients with moderate, severe and extremely severe ARI for the purpose of triage, assessing the nature of changes in the chest cavity and determining the prognosis of the disease: -performing CT of the lungs without intravenous contrast enhancement in inpatient conditions or in outpatient settings -with indications for hospitalization; -performing RG of the lungs in two projections, if CT is not possible in a given medical organization / clinical situation. 140 (105) CT is better than Chest Xray for diagnosis early. Bilateral pneumonia is a common finding of COVID-19 pneumonia 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57 (91) Daily chest radiographs are NOT indicated in stable intubated patients with COVID-19 103 (93) Broncoscopia: En pacientes hospitalizados con COVID-19 confirmado, se pueden recoger muestras repetidas de vía aérea superior e inferior para demostrar el aclaramiento viral, cuya frecuencia dependerá de las características y los recursos de la epidemia local10 103 (93) Indicaciones de realización de broncoscopia: 2. Si se presenta una atelectasia lobar o pulmonar total. 3. Ante una hemoptisis crítica con inestabilidad hemodinámica que precise maniobras endoscópicas para controlar la hemorragia. 4. Para la extracción de un cuerpo extra˜no. 5. Para el tratamiento de una obstrucción, de origen benigno o maligno, de la vía aérea central grave que sea sintomática o dificulte el manejo terapéutico del paciente. 6. Como ayuda a las medidas de soporte ventilatorio, como son la necesidad de una intubación endotraqueal o la realización de una traqueotomía percutánea y el manejo de sus complicaciones. 7. La ocupación pleural sintomática, bien por airecomo complicación por iatrogenia o espontánea-o por líquido pleural. 8. El resto de las indicaciones, cuando no exista repercusión clínica ni dificulte o imposibilite el manejo terapéutico del paciente, se debe de posponer a que el paciente esté libre de la enfermedad. 130 (103) ECG is required for all hospitalized patients to measure baseline QT interval as some subjects may require drugs like chloroquine and/or azithromycin which may cause QT interval prolongation and cardiovascular events. 19 with the need for hospitalization, a chest CT scan without injection is useful, in search of a fibrotic evolution. It should not be done too early: recommendation around 3 months. This point remains to be clarified, however, because the data are non-existent. 2 / Patient who remains or becomes symptomatic again: Imaging is recommended, to be decided between non-injected CT and angiography, depending on the clinic and biology, and knowing that a threshold of D-dimers a little higher than usual can probably be tolerated in these patients. 153 (108) Chest radiography is not sensitive for the detection of ground glass opacities, which are the main imaging features of COVID-19 pneumonia. It should be restricted to the follow-up of patients admitted to intensive care units, who are too fragile to be sent for CT 153 (108) Chest ultrasound does not allow differentiation between bacterial and viral pneumoniae, nor between pulmonary oedema and infection. Ultrasound is used at the bedside to diagnose complications such as a pneumothorax under mechanical ventilation or pleural effusions and can help in adjusting mechanical ventilation or monitoring pulmonary fluid load. 159 (110) Chest X-rays are useful in clinically worsening patients, but daily chest X-rays in stable patients are not necessary and may increase the risk of viral transmission6,7 to health care workers. 171 (123) Focused lung ultrasound and general lung ultrasound (F-LUS/ LUS) is useful to monitor disease progression and to diagnose complications at the bedside with minimal exposure of disease to fellow patients and health-care personnel.

(86)

Guidance on discharge and ending isolation in the context of widespread community transmission: Critical infrastructure responders (e.g. heathcare workers, law enforcement, firefighters etc.). End isolation after resolution of fever for at least three days AND after eight days from the onset of symptoms have passed. Healthcare workers can return to work immediately after that, using a surgical mask during work hours until 14 days after the onset of symptoms have passed*. · If testing capacity allows, for a clinically recovered patient, two negative RT-PCR tests from respiratory specimens at 24 hours interval, at least eight days after onset of symptoms. Critical infrastructure responders, especially HCWs, should be considered a priority group for testing during the pandemic. 61 (86) Guidance on discharge and ending isolation in the context of widespread community transmission: Family members and other categories of contacts of COVID-19 patients: This category refers to: · Partners and spouses · Family members and other persons sharing housing or taking care of COVID-19 patients: For guidance on household care of a COVID-19 case, refer to the relevant ECDC guidance [28] . Caretakers of COVID-19 patients should self-quarantine for 14 days after last contact with sick spouse/relative. Caretakers or family members that develop symptoms in the 14-day quarantine period, should stay in home isolation for eight days after onset of symptoms AND until resolution of fever for at least three days AND clinical improvement of other symptoms, or seek medical care, if symptoms worsen. 61 (86) Guidance on discharge and ending isolation in the context of widespread community transmission: Hospitalised suspected or confirmed COVID-19 cases: This category refers to: · Patients who are hospitalised with suspected or laboratory confirmed COVID-19 (mild, severe and critically ill) [27] · Confirmed COVID-19 patients discharged early, due to clinical improvement. If testing and hospitalisation capacity allows, · For a clinically recovered patient, two negative RT-PCR tests from respiratory specimens at 24 hours interval at least eight days after onset of symptoms [4] If limited/no testing capacity, · Patient can be discharged based on clinical criteria, per evaluation of the treating physician, AND · the discharged patient should self-isolate at home or in a safe place until resolution of fever for at least three days and clinical improvement of other symptoms AND · until eight days after the onset of symptoms for mild cases or for 14 days (severe cases) if these criteria have not been fulfilled in hospital. · Follow-up visits, or monitoring via phone or other electronic device can be considered. · These patients should be prioritised for testing. 61 (86) Guidance on discharge and ending isolation in the context of widespread community transmission: Immunocompromised patients: Self-isolation should last until all of the following criteria are fulfilled: at least 14 days after symptom onset AND resolution of fever for at least three days AND clinical improvement of symptoms other than fever. 61 (86) Guidance on discharge and ending isolation in the context of widespread community transmission: Mild suspected or confirmed COVID-19 cases: This category refers to: · Confirmed COVID-19 patients never hospitalised due to mild symptoms or asymptomatic presentation · Suspected or probable COVID-19 patients in the community, who adhered to the stay-at-home advice by the national authorities. These patients can end self-isolation eight days after the onset of symptoms AND resolution of fever AND clinical improvement of other symptoms for at least for three days. 131 (104) Criteria for Recovery and Discontinuing Isolation: For symptomatic confirmed patients: At least 3 days have passed since recovery (resolution of the fever without using fever reducing medication and respiratory symptom resolution (cough and SOB) AND followed by 2 negative respiratory samples ≥ 24 hours apart. 131 (104) Criteria for Recovery and Discontinuing Isolation: For symptomatic confirmed patients: If PCR test not feasible, resolution of the fever without using fever reducing medication and respiratory symptom resolution for at least 3 days AND at least 10 days have passed since symptom first appeared (exclude HCWs and sever cases from this approach). 149 (106) Criteria for discharging patients from isolation (i.e., discontinuing transmission-based precautions) without requiring retesting: • For symptomatic patients: 10 days after symptom onset, plus at least 3 additional days without symptoms (including without feverii and without respiratory symptoms) • For asymptomatic casesiv: 10 days after positive test for SARS-CoV-2. Countries can choose to continue to use a laboratory testing algorithm as part of the release criteria in (a subset of) infected individuals if their risk assessment gives reason to do so. 164 (111) For hospitalized patients with COVID-19 whose symptoms are resolved, WHO suggests not using chest imaging in addition to clinical and/or laboratory assessment to inform the decision regarding discharge (Conditional recommendation, based on expert opinion)

(81)

Condiciones para el alta: a) Clínica: Mejoría del estado general: i. Evolución sin fiebre por al menos 48 horas. ii. Gasometría normal, y sin necesidad de 02 adicional; b) Resultados de Laboratorio: (en normalización si previamente estuvieron alterados) i. Recuento de leucocitos y linfocitos ii. Recuento de plaquetas iii. CK iv. Función hepática v. Sodio plasmático vi. Proteína C reactiva. vii. Radiografía de tórax: mejoría de imágenes radiológicas 39 (81) Seguimiento post alta de casos: i. Indicar control de temperatura dos veces al día. Si se presenta alza en más de dos mediciones reportar inmediatamente al centro donde estuvo hospitalizado. 39 (81) Seguimiento post alta de casos: iii. Si el paciente persiste con tos en su domicilio deberá usar mascarilla quirúrgica hasta la resolución del síntoma o en su defecto sus contactos domiciliarios. 39 (81) Seguimiento post alta de casos: iv. Control a los 7 días de alta con radiografía de tórax, hemograma y exámenes de laboratorio si se mantuvo alguno alterado al alta. De acuerdo con condición del paciente indicar nuevos exámenes en 7 días. 40 (82) Se recomienda para pacientes inmunocomprometidos, hemato-oncológicos, y receptores y donantes de trasplantes, mantener el aislamiento de pacientes infectados con SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 hasta la obtención de dos (2) RTPCR para SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 negativas consecutivas. (Fuerte a favor) 40 (82) Se recomienda que los pacientes con infección SARSCoV-2/ COVID-19 pueden ser dados de alta y continuar aislamiento en casa si cumplen los siguientes criterios: ► Ausencia de fiebre >48 horas sin antipiréticos y ► Mejoría clínica de los síntomas respiratorios y la hipoxemia y ► No requiere hospitalización por otras patologías y ► Tolerancia a la vía oral (Fuerte a favor) 40 (82) Se sugiere, en caso de disponibilidad, mantener el aislamiento de pacientes infectados con SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 hasta la obtención de una (1) RT-PCR para SARSCoV-2/COVID-19 negativa.(Fuerte a favor) 40 (82)Si no es posible controlar con RT-PCR, se recomienda extender el aislamiento de pacientes infectados con SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 confirmados hasta completar el periodo máximo registrado de diseminación viral de 14 a 28 días, de acuerdo con la gravedad de los síntomas y la resolución de estos. (Débil a favor) 91 (90) 5. Clinical image: 5.1. Asymptomatic or mild type: Virological monitoring: After a double negative result, the patient can be released from isolation or hospitalisation if his/her clinical condition permits. 91 (90) 5. Clinical image: 5.1. Asymptomatic or mild type: Virological monitoring: If any of the two control results is positive, the test should be repeated at intervals of 7 days until negative. 98 (91) CT is indicated in patients with functional impairment and/or hypoxemia after recovery from COVID-19 (83) Hospitalised patients with moderate-severe disease (who require hospitalisation due to Covid-19) can be de-isolated 10 days after achievement of clinical stability (i.e. from when they are not requiring supplemental oxygen and are otherwise clinically stable). 232 (83) Repeat PCR testing is NOT required in order to de-isolate a patient and is not recommended. 232 (83) Symptomatic patients with mild disease (not requiring hospitalisation for Covid-19) can be deisolated 10 days after the onset of their symptoms, provided their fever has resolved and their other symptoms are improving.

Rationale 3

Describe the rationale for the review in the context of what is already known. Explain why the review questions/objectives lend themselves to a scoping review approach.

4

Objectives 4Provide an explicit statement of the questions and objectives being addressed with reference to their key elements (e.g., population or participants, concepts, and context) or other relevant key elements used to conceptualize the review questions and/or objectives.

12

If done, provide a rationale for conducting a critical appraisal of included sources of evidence; describe the methods used and how this information was used in any data synthesis (if appropriate). 13 Describe the methods of handling and summarizing the data that were charted. 7

Selection of sources of evidence 14

Give numbers of sources of evidence screened, assessed for eligibility, and included in the review, with reasons for exclusions at each stage, ideally using a flow diagram.

(flow diagram)

Characteristics of sources of evidence 15For each source of evidence, present characteristics for which data were charted and provide the citations. Appendix 6Critical appraisal within sources of evidence 16 If done, present data on critical appraisal of included sources of evidence (see item 12). Appendix 5Results of individual sources of evidence 17For each included source of evidence, present the relevant data that were charted that relate to the review questions and objectives.

Appendix 6

Synthesis of results 18 Summarize and/or present the charting results as they relate to the review questions and objectives. 14 ( fig.3 )

Conclusions 21

Provide a general interpretation of the results with respect to the review questions and objectives, as well as potential implications and/or next steps.

