Introduction

Real-world data demonstrating the effectiveness of vaccines against SARS-CoV-2 [1] [2] [3] are badly needed not only to understand the impact of mass vaccination on virus transmission and death tolls, but also to collect evidence useful for specific recommendations. For instance, the antibody response after a single dose of BNT162b2 mRNA COVID-19 (Pfizer/BioNTech) and mRNA-1273 (Moderna) vaccines in individuals with previous SARS-CoV-2 infection demonstrated comparable to or even stronger than that observed after the second dose in naïve people [4, 5] . Based on this, some European countries recommend the administration of a single dose of BNT162b2 mRNA COVID-19, mRNA-1273 and ChAdOx1-S vaccines in individuals with previous SARS-CoV-2 infection [6] . This recommendation is beneficial in settings where scarce availability of vaccine supplies is hampering a rapid progression of the immunization campaigns [7] .Some cohort studies demonstrated that reinfections are rare in the 7 months following natural SARS-CoV-2 infection [8] , posing the basis to delay vaccination after recovery from the infection, as recommended in some countries [6, 9] . Other real-world data could however be important to fully address this and other aspects of the vaccination policies.Primary objectives of this study are to describe 1) the prevalence of the infection prior to vaccination 2) the antibody response to the BNT162b2 mRNA COVID-19 vaccine in a cohort of HCWs of a single hospital, comparing different subgroups at different time points. An exploratory analysis evaluated the adverse effects (AE).

Study setting and participants

The study was carried out at the IRCCS Sacro Cuore Don Calabria hospital, Negrar, Verona, Italy between January 1 st and March 30 th , 2021. All consenting HCWs supplied blood samples upon administration of the first (T0) and the second dose (T1) of vaccine, and 2 to 3 weeks after the second dose (T2). At T2 the study investigators collected information with a previously -piloted questionnaire on possible AE. The (that is, periodically tested with PCR as per the hospital protocol, and resulting negative) but any positive serology at T0 D) Naïve individuals: no previous infection and negative serology tests

Ethical issues

The study protocol received ethical clearance by the local Ethics Committee (Comitato Etico per la Sperimentazione Clinica delle Province di Verona e Rovigo) on 13 th January 2021 (study protocol n. 17985).Participants received written and oral information and signed an informed consent form.

Laboratory tests

Serum samples were tested for: IgG anti nucleocapide protein (IgG-N), IgM anti spike protein (IgM-S) andIgG anti receptor binding domain, including neutralizing antibodies (IgG-RBD-S). Laboratory procedures are detailed in Supplementary File 1.Primary outcomes were: 1) Estimation of baseline prevalence prior to vaccination , calculated as the proportion of HCWs found serologically positive at T0 over the total number of HCWs tested. J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f 2) Antibody response to vaccination at T1 and T2 of the different study groups, calculated as the median values (IQR) of antibodies.For the exploratory analysis on AE, the outcome was the prevalence of AE following the first (D1) and the second (D2) doses of vaccine, calculated as the number of AE over the number of participants who responded to the questionnaire. The proportion of each specific AE was reported as the number of each AE over the number of participants reporting an AE. The frequency of the total number of AE and of each specific AE was compared between study groups.

Statistical analysis

Repeated measures analysis was used to compare test results over study time points, broken down by study groups. The analysis was performed in SAS software version 9.4 using the procedure glm. It included different models, each one evaluating one of the covariates considered (study group, presence of symptoms, age, sex), on the whole cohort or in a specific subgroup. Each model evaluated the possible influence of the considered covariate on the test results and a time effect, i.e., the magnitude of change in test results over time. The resulting "interaction time variable" indicated whether the covariate included in each model had a significant (p<0.05) effect on test results in at least one of the study time points. The time point(s) where the effect was found was/were reported in the pertinent column(s) (T0, T1, T2), with some details about the favouring condition (for instance, indicating whether it was the female or the male sex to be associated with a significantly higher value of antibodies).We also used Friedman test (G) followed by Wilcoxon rank-sum test (U) in the post-hoc analysis orMcNemar's Test for paired proportions to compare results between time points and strata. p-values were adjused (adj. p) appropriately in case of multiple comparisons. Considering the whole cohort, IgM-S and IgG-RBD-S values significantly increased from T0 to T1 and from T1 to T2 (G p <.0001, U adj. p 0.0020), while IgG-N (G p <.0001) significantly increased from T0 to T1 (U adj. Additional factors which could possibly impact on the antibody response were explored with the repeated measures analysis (Table 3) . and November, at T0 we found that the former group had a significantly lower median antibody level than the latter one (p=0.0081), but antibody response was significantly higher in HCWs infected in March both at T1 and T2 (p<0.0001 both comparisons).

Participants

With a multivariate analysis, we explored a possible impact of other variables such as sex, age, symptoms, that could explain the higher response in people infected earlier, but none of those considered were found significant.

Adverse events

Patients reporting at least one AE were 1, Symptoms frequently reported are shown in Table 2 . were significantly more frequent at D2 compared with D1. The antibody level of Seropositive exCOVID-19 at T1 was significantly higher than that of naive individuals at T2, as was already reported by smaller studies [1, [13] [14] [15] . Moreover, here we found that having J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f symptoms during SARS-CoV-2 infection was also significantly associated with a boosted response. It might hence be questioned whether a single vaccine shot could be proposed to those with a history of symptomatic infection, rather than barely of infection. A serological baseline assessment in order to recommend a single rather than a double dose would be also supported by our results, although this would be probably impracticable.

Discussion

Other factors that showed to influence the antibody response were age, sex, and time elapsed from natural infection to vaccination. The latter variable is of particular interest in relation to vaccination policy. Indeed, Italian guidelines recommend a single dose of BNT162b2 mRNA COVID-19 vaccine in people who had the infection from 3 to 6 months before vaccination. This approach is not entirely supported by our findings.Our results clearly show that the single shot might be still recommended for people infected even 9 months before, and probably more.AE, mostly local reactions, were reported by the large majority of HCWs, and were significantly more frequent after the second vaccine dose. Overall, AE were more frequent than what was reported in the phase 2/3 randomized clinical trial assessing efficacy and safety of the BNT162b2 vaccine [16] and other cohort studies [17, 18] . Although we did not collect data about the grading of AE, we observed no SAE with the exception of the individual who died and for whom causality assessment is ongoing.Main limitation of this study is the use of IgG-RBD-S antibodies as a surrogate of neutralizing antibodies, althougha correlation between IgG-RBD-S and neutralizing antibodies has been found previously [19] [20] [21] .Also, the number of infected individuals was small in several months (i.e. between first and second epidemic waves, mirroring the epidemiological situation in Italy), limiting the understanding of the antibody response of HCWs infected between 9 and 4 months before vaccination. However, the comparison between March and November (the months with the largest number of patients of the first and second wave, respectively) was useful to evaluate the antibody response in relation to time from natural infection.The sample size of the different groups was different, due to the composition of the whole cohort.

J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f

However, we believe that the trend of antibody response was well-depicted also for smaller groups, though limiting further stratification.A strength of this study was the size of our cohort, that was big enough to permit a stratification in subgroups, thus providing results that may be relevant to inform vaccination policy.

Conflict of interest

All authors declare no conflict of interest

Funding

This work was funded by the Italian Ministry of Health under "Fondi Ricerca Corrente"-L1P1 and "Progetto COVID Ricerca Finalizzata 2020 12371675" to IRCCS Sacro Cuore Don Calabria Hospital

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to all staff of the Department who gave support for the implementation of this study, including other personell from the ward, from the laboratory, nurses and administrative staff.

Contribution

DB conceived the work, analyzed and interpreted the data, wrote the first draft; CP conceived the work, analyzed and interpreted the data, contributed to the first draft; FG conceived the work, interpreted the data and critically revised the draft; DM contributed to data collection and interpretation; GB contributed to data collection and interpretation, TU contributed to data collection and interpretation, LM contributed to data collection and interpretation, NR contributed to data collection and interpretation, AA contributed to data collection and interpretation and critically revised the manuscript, PR contributed to data collection and interpretation, CC contributed to data collection and interpretation, FT contributed to data collection and interpretation, ST contributed to data collection and interpretation, ER contributed to data collection and interpretation, MD contributed to data collection and interpretation; MD contributed to data collection and interpretation, MP contributed to data collection and interpretation; RS performed the statistical analysis and contributed to the first draft; ZB conceived the work, analyzed and interpreted the data, contributed to the first draft. All authors approved the final version of the manuscript. 

