

I, the Submitting Author has the right to grant and does grant on behalf of all authors of the Work (as defined in the below author licence), an exclusive licence and/or a non-exclusive licence for contributions from authors who are: i) UK Crown employees; ii) where BMJ has agreed a CC-BY licence shall apply, and/or iii) in accordance with the terms applicable for US Federal Government officers or employees acting as part of their official duties; on a worldwide, perpetual, irrevocable, royalty-free basis to BMJ Publishing Group Ltd ("BMJ") its licensees and where the relevant Journal is co-owned by BMJ to the co-owners of the Journal, to publish the Work in this journal and any other BMJ products and to exploit all rights, as set out in our licence.The Submitting Author accepts and understands that any supply made under these terms is made by BMJ to the Submitting Author unless you are acting as an employee on behalf of your employer or a postgraduate student of an affiliated institution which is paying any applicable article publishing charge ("APC") for Open Access articles. Where the Submitting Author wishes to make the Work available on an Open Access basis (and intends to pay the relevant APC), the terms of reuse of such Open Access shall be governed by a Creative Commons licence -details of these licences and which Creative Commons licence will apply to this Work are set out in our licence referred to above.Other than as permitted in any relevant BMJ Author's Self Archiving Policies, I confirm this Work has not been accepted for publication elsewhere, is not being considered for publication elsewhere and does not duplicate material already published. I confirm all authors consent to publication of this Work and authorise the granting of this licence. 

Introduction

The ongoing COVID-19 outbreak has expanded rapidly throughout China 1 .The novel coronavirus quickly spread to other countries in Asia within a month of onset and subsequently around the world. On 11 March 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared COVID-19 a global pandemic 2 . As of January 27, 2021, more than 100,000,000 COVID-19 cases have been reported worldwide, with more than 2,000,000 deaths (Johns Hopkins University, 2020; World Health Organization [WHO], 2020).Consequently, the study of the spread mechanisms and prevention and control strategies of COVID-19 has become a global problem to be solved.The novel coronavirus is highly contagious and the act of withholding symptoms is posing a difficult challenge for epidemic prevention and control, and has greatly undermined epidemic response measures.Although many infected people only experience mild symptoms or are asymptomatic, the specific portion of symptomatic carriers who withhold their symptoms need behavioral interventions. Health experts note that the disease does not discriminate against people regardless of age, sex, sexuality, race, ethnicity, class or other social markers (WHO, 2020). However, the elderly, low-income families, indigenous peoples and those with chronic or immune diseases are considered more vulnerable to pandemics (WHO, 2020). One category missing from the list of vulnerable groups is international students, who can be severely affected by the disease socially and economically because of their immigration status. Moreover, as has been demonstrated in previous pandemics, lack of proper knowledge about the disease is associated with negative behaviors among people, which can further complicate efforts to prevent the spread of disease 3 .It is therefore imperative that International Students be equipped with knowledge and healthy behaviors to limit the impact of COVID-19.With the deepening of China's openness and the "One Belt And One Road" policy, the number of international students studying in China has been increasing. As part of its socio-economic development, China has jumped from being the largest exporter of international students to the third largest recipient. In 2018, China had nearly 500,000 international students in higher education, of which more than 70 percent are from Asia and Africa 4 .Therefore when encountering public health emergencies, international students have become an important part of the community, and it is extremely important for them to effectively deal with the epidemic. According to the Chinese CDC in February 2020, there were over 1,000 cases of cluster COVID-19 in the countries, 83% of them are of family origin or occur common gathering places, such as medical facilities, schools, shopping centers and factories 5 . To avoid cases of imported infections, schools banning students to return to China if they were abroad and those who remained in China should adhere to the epidemic prevention measures and have been asked to report daily if symptoms of COVID-19 such as fever, cough. A press conference of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in a statement declared that some foreigners did not abide by the relevant regulations, and even provoked incidents, which aroused public outrage again. Since the outbreak of the epidemic many international students (foreigners) did not cooperate with community epidemic prevention and control measures. All foreigners in China should strictly abide by the "Law of the People's Republic of China" on epidemic prevention and control. These regulations are for everyone living in China, including Chinese citizens and foreigners. Each individual is the most important factor in promoting health, right or wrong behavior are influenced by personal beliefs, values, inclinations, and habits 6 .As resistance to cooperation has grown, the Chinese authorities have taken more drastic control and preventive measures, including restricting the movement of people in cities and communities, rewarding those who provide clues to withholders and facilitating systematic and comprehensive searches through communities 5 .In situations such as these, evidence based public health frameworks can provide a useful temporary measure. One such framework is the Health Belief Model (HBM). The HBM was originally developed to study why patients may not seek screening for tuberculosis 7 , 8 and is one of the most prominent public health frameworks for understanding why individuals may or may not act in the face of a threat to personal or community health. The HBM has been used for decades to study vaccination, medication adherence, diabetes self-care, condom use, and other behaviors that require modification of a patient's actions to mitigate a threat to health. Broadly speaking, HBM believes that direct cues from an individual's beliefs and actions can guide behavior. Beliefs, in turn, are determined by one's background, including one's impressions of perceived threats, perceived benefits of taking action, perceived barriers to taking action and perceived ability to take action (i.e. perceived self-efficacy) 9 .Given all these concerns, the observance of preventive health standards and behaviors in society is essential to better control the disease. Numerous research studies are being conducted on COVID-19, but this article is the first to highlight this area. Additionally, a study focusing on international students' knowledge and behavior amid the pandemic will provide information for countries to cut off the chain of disease transmission of all variant of COVID-19. Therefore, this study's goals were as follows: 1) to examine the level of knowledge of international students ; 2) to elucidate and analyze the student's beliefs associated with self-reporting if symptoms; 3) to provide effective suggestions and measures for encouraging the students to report if symptoms of pneumonia.Background/rationale 2 The ongoing COVID-19 is a serious public health issue in the world. Consequently, the study of the spread mechanisms and prevention and control strategies of COVID-19 has become a global problem to be solved.Moreover, as has been demonstrated in previous pandemics, lack of proper knowledge about the disease is associated with negative behaviours among people, which can further complicate efforts to prevent the spread of disease. It is therefore imperative that communities be equipped with knowledge to limit the impact of COVID-19.In the meantime, resistance arise among international students to comply with prevention measures towards COVID-19 in China necessitating an intervention.In situations such as these, evidence based public health frameworks can provide a useful temporary measure. One such framework is the Health Belief Model (HBM). Objectives 3 This study's goals were as follows: 1) to examine the level of knowledge of international students ; 2) to elucidate and analyse the student's beliefs associated with self-reporting of symptoms; 3) to provide effective suggestions and measures for encouraging the students to report if symptoms of pneumonia. In addition, this study tested the following hypotheses:1) Perceived susceptibility and severity of COVID-19 infection will be positively associated with healthy behaviour such as COVID-19 symptoms self-reporting.2) Perceived benefits of reporting symptoms will be positively associated with willingness to early report if related symptoms of pneumonia.3) Perceived barriers to self-report symptoms will be negatively associated with willingness to self-report.

Setting

Heilongjiang Province, is located along the northeast border of China. It covers an area of over 460,000 square kilometers, and has a population of 37.68 million. The capital city of Heilongjiang Province is Harbin. In March Heilongjiang was become the province with most diagnosed patients in China (i.e. even worse than Hubei province). By March 11, 2020 , according to Chinese CDC a total of 482 domestic cases of COVID-19 was reported in Heilongjiang and most of cases were imported. The incidence rate of COVID-19 was relatively high and the early epidemic was serious in Heilongjiang, The number of cases was large in clusters especially family clusters 10 . We purposively selected Heilongjiang for this study.

Questionnaire design

After an initial draft of the questionnaire were designed it was validated by the research team. After a thorough discussion, questionnaire was finalized by the authors and subsequently distributed to participants for their responses through WeChat. The final version of questionnaire included the following parts: (1) Socio-demographic information; (2) knowledge of respondents ;( 3) Willingness and beliefs associated with reporting symptoms; (4) possibility investigation of healthy behavior. The dependent variable in this study was the respondents' self-rated willingness to report if related symptoms of pneumonia, which was evaluated by the item: 'If related symptoms occur, how likely are you to report or go to a designated medical institution?' using a five-point Likert scale ranging from 1 to 5 (definitely would not report, would not report, unsure, would report, definitely would report).During analysis, for the purpose of comparing, respondents who had a positive willingness toward reporting with those who did not, we sorted those who selected 4 and 5 into the category 'report', and those who selected 1, 2, and 3 into the category 'not report'.Socio-demographic data were collected, including the respondents' gender, age, education level, if medical student or not, marital status, living arrangement, and religious belief. Among them, the religious belief data was obtained by the item: 'Do you have a religion', using Yes or NO as the answer option.The level of knowledge regarding COVID-19 of the international students was assessed in which Yes or No option was given against each set of question. The study instrument assessed the knowledge of international students by asking questions about the symptoms, the virus, and treatment, source of transmission and prevention of COVID-19.The respondents' beliefs associated with reporting symptoms was assessed through the construct of Health Belief Model (HBM), to which they indicated their degree of agreement by selecting a rating between 1 (strongly disagree) and 5 (strongly agree). The respondents overall perceptions of reporting symptoms and the COVID-19 infection were evaluated by the following prompts:Perceived susceptibility, which was measured by five items. Each participant subjectively assessed the probability of him or her suffering from COVID-19; that is, the probability of falling sick because of individual characteristics and related addictive behaviors. The Cronbach's alpha coefficient was 0.46The perceived severity was measured by nine items that were designed to help participants assess the severity of COVID-19 and understand their personal feelings. These items included questions about Perceived benefits of undergoing a timely consultation when having symptoms of suspected pneumonia were measured by 4 items that were designed to assess whether participants believed that undergoing a timely consultation after having symptoms of suspected pneumonia would reduce the possibility of suffering from COVID-19.The Cronbach's alpha coefficient was 0.90Perceived barriers of carrying out a report were measured with twelve items intended to help participants to assess the barriers that prevented them from taking action to undergo a report after having pneumonia symptoms. The Cronbach's alpha coefficient was 0.85Additionally cues to action were measured by nine items that investigated internal and external stimuli that influenced a participant's choice to report and undergo a consultation. Such stimuli included self-perceived of COVID-19, influence of family and friends, mass media communication on novel coronavirus. The Cronbach's alpha coefficient was 0.90Finally self-efficacy was measured by three items aimed at determining whether participants were confident that, under special circumstances, they could overcome the barriers to undergoing a consultation or report. The Cronbach's alpha coefficient was 0.69 During analysis, all responses to the prompts were converted into binary variables: respondents who rated 4 and 5 were sorted into the category 'agree', whereas respondents who rated 1, 2, and 3 were sorted into the category 'disagree'.In the questionnaire, we also designed items to investigate healthy behaviors which would promote respondents to report, in other words the likelihood of respect of the prevention and control measures .this variable was measured by fifteen items that were designed to assess the possibility that a participant would comply with the prevention and control measure toward COVID-19.The Cronbach's alpha coefficient was 0.96. We investigated healthy behavior in which Yes or No option was given against each set of question.After conducting the necessary literature research and receiving expert advice, we developed a selfadministered questionnaire (supplementary file 1). To confirm the effectiveness of the questionnaire, we invited experts from fields such as health emergency, epidemiology, and public psychology, as well as three health administration workers who are currently in charge of epidemic prevention and control, to engage in two rounds of reviews of the questionnaire. They responded to the entire questionnaire and again two weeks later. The data obtained was not used for the final analysis. This questionnaire included the following parts:(1) Socio-demographic information; (2) knowledge of respondents; (3) Willingness and beliefs associated with reporting symptoms; (4) possibility investigation of healthy behavior. The dependent variable in this study was the respondents' self-rated willingness to report if related symptoms of pneumonia, which was evaluated by the item: 'If related symptoms occur, how likely are you to report or go to a designated medical institution?' using a five-point Likert scale ranging from 1 to 5 (definitely would not report, would not report, unsure, would report, definitely would report). During analysis, for the purpose of comparing, respondents who had a positive willingness toward reporting with those who did not, we sorted those who selected 4 and 5 into the category 'report', and those who selected 1, 2, and 3 into the category 'not report'.Socio-demographic data were collected, including the respondents' gender, age, education level, medical and non-medical student, marital status, living arrangement, and religious belief. Among them, the religious belief data was obtained by the item: 'Do you have a religion', using yes or no as the answer option.The questions that address the knowledge of students as well as the HBM components for the current study were adapted from the information available in published articles.The level of knowledge regarding COVID-19 of the international students was assessed in which yes, no or don't know option was given against each set of question. Additionally a Likert scale were used to which they indicated their degree of agreement by selecting a rating between 1 and 5. For data analysis, only yes and no responses were examined.Based on the 80-100%, correct answer for each question was considered as appropriate knowledge and below 80.0% was considered as inappropriate knowledge. Similarly, healthy behavior were also categorized.The respondents' beliefs associated with reporting symptoms was assessed through the construct of Health Belief Model (HBM), to which they indicated their degree of agreement by selecting a rating between 1 (strongly disagree) and 5 (strongly agree). To test the internal consistency of the HBM components, Cronbach's alphas were computed for each subscale as described in table 1. The respondents overall perceptions of reporting symptoms and the COVID-19 infection were evaluated by the following prompts: In the questionnaire, we also designed items to investigate healthy behaviors which would promote respondents to report, in other words the likelihood of respect of the prevention and control measures. We investigated healthy behavior in which a five-point Likert scale ranging was given against each set of question.This variable was measured by fifteen items that were designed to assess the possibility that a participant would comply with the prevention and control measure toward COVID-19. The positive healthy behaviors parameters included effectiveness of mask use, hand washing, social distancing in preventing the disease etc.The Cronbach's alpha coefficient was 0.96During analysis, all responses to the prompts were converted into binary variables: respondents who rated 4 and 5 were sorted into the category 'agree', whereas respondents who rated 1, 2, and 3 were sorted into the category 'disagree'. 

Sample and data collection:

The cross-sectional study was carried out in the format of an anonymous web-based questionnaire. The questionnaire survey was conducted among international students of Heilongjiang province. We have sent a link to the questionnaire to the residents in their communities through social networking software such as WeChat (WeChat is the largest social media in China similar to Facebook and Twitter, and the number of monthly active accounts has reached to 1.165 billion 11 .Alongside an explanation of the study's intention and anonymity those who received the link could voluntarily decide whether to respond. The data were collected between 1 and 25 March, 2020. Finally, according to the questionnaire network platform, 132 people (international students) clicked on the link and 119 responded to the questionnaire (potential response rate = 90.15%). Descriptive analysis were conducted to identify socio-demographic and the level of knowledge of international students on COVID-19 .Additionally Chi-squared test, Fisher's exact test and logistic regression were performed to examine factors and beliefs associated with report if symptoms of pneumonia, as well as their impact on the willingness to self-report symptoms. SPSS 20 (IBM, 2010) was used to conduct the analysis. Statistical significance was set at P < 0.05The cross-sectional study was carried out in the format of an anonymous web-based questionnaire. The questionnaire was in English and it was pre-tested among a cross section of participants to ensure the clarity of questions and eliminate the ambiguity. The questionnaire survey was conducted among international students of Heilongjiang province. We have sent a link to the questionnaire to the residents in their communities through social networking software such as WeChat (WeChat is the largest social media in China similar to Facebook and Twitter, and the number of monthly active accounts has reached to 1.165 billion), [5] . Only international students located in Heilongjiang during the pandemic were considered eligible to take part in this study. It has been asked not make duplication if he or she already responded. Alongside an explanation of the study's intention and anonymity those who received the link could voluntarily decide whether to respond. Exclusion criteria included unwillingness, living out of Heilongjiang and sickness. The data were collected between 1 and 25 March, 2020. A purposive sampling technique was adopted to obtain the sample. Finally, according to the questionnaire network platform, 132 people (international students) clicked on the link and 119 responded to the questionnaire (potential response rate = 90.15%).

Patient and public involvement

No patient involved in this study. Study participants were not involved in the setting of the research questions or study design. Furthermore, study finding will be disseminate with the participants.No patient involved in this study. Study participants were not involved in the setting of the research questions or study design. Additionally, study finding will be disseminate with the participants. chose to report. 18.08% of men chose not to report, which was higher than that of women (12%). Respondents aged 21 to 30 had the highest non-reporting rate (12.79%). In terms of education level, the proportion of people who chose not to report was the highest among those with master degree and above (18.68%), but the lowest among those with high school and below(18.68%). Single respondents had a higher percentage of non-reporter (20.48%) than married. The proportion of people who chose not to report among the respondents living with others (33.33%) was higher than living alone (17.64%) and living with family or friends (18.18%). 

Characteristics of the respondents

More than half of the respondents (79.0%) were men. The ages of the respondents were concentrated between 21 and 30 years old (58.0%). Among the respondents, 76.5% had an education level of master's degree or above, and 37% were medical students. The vast majority of the respondents (74.48%) were Muslims, and 42.9% lived alone .Of the result 85.7% are black people while 4.2 % are white and 10.1% are Asian. A proportion of 16.80% of the respondents chose not to report when they had related symptoms of pneumonia, and 83.19% chose to report. 18.08% of men chose not to report, which was higher than that of women (12%). Respondents aged 21 to 30 had the highest non-reporting rate (12.79%). In terms of education level, the proportion of people who chose not to report was the highest among those with master degree and above (18.68%), but the lowest among those with high school and below(18.68%). Single respondents had a higher percentage of non-reporter (20.48%) than married. The proportion of people who chose not to report among the respondents living with others (33.33%) was higher than living alone (17.64%) and living with family or friends (18.18%). Table 1 displays correlation between sociodemographic and willingness to report to the doctor if symptoms of pneumonia. 

COVID-19 knowledge among international students

To assess the knowledge of students, we found a total of 112 (79.2%) who answered it is useful to reduce assembly. Additionally, the vast majority (91.6 %) agreed that wearing mask is useful. Of the result, 80.7 % answered knowing the symptoms of COVID-19 and 88.2% agreed that quarantine is necessary. Almost all of the respondents (95%) think that regularly washing hands is useful. The study showed that poor knowledge was more apparent in response to questions regarding the virus and the treatment of COVID 19 such as smoking or drinking alcohol can kill the virus. It is noteworthy to state that this study did not find a significant association between knowledge and behavioral change. Figure 1 describes the current status of COVID-19 knowledge among international students. reporting and consultation, the unwillingness and fear of finding out that they had COVID-19 were reported by more than 40% of respondents. Those willing to report were significantly more likely to have fears about discovering they had the disease than the opposite group .In addition, about 13% of respondents agreed that reporting is inconvenient. Finally, when cues to action were assessed, the majority (55.46%) agreed to go to the hospital on time for their symptoms to worsen, 67.22% agreed to report or go to the hospital on time for advice of the health professional and 53.78% agreed to report to the healthcare because concealing the illness, travel history, and close contact history of the diagnosed person will be punished by laws and regulations. Domain of self-efficacy showed that less than half (38.65%) agreed to take the time to report to the doctor, 65.54% were confident that they will go to the clinic to report. Broadly, the results indicated that most respondents had relatively high, perceived severity, perceived benefits, cue to action and perceived self-efficacy, but lower perceived susceptibility and barriers. The correlation analysis indicated that all domains in HBM expect perceived susceptibility had significant effects on preventive behaviors from COVID-19 (p < 0.05). Table 2 displays the factors that are significantly correlated with a willingness to report if related symptoms of pneumonia. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y   10 Adjusted odds ratios, the P value of reporting in the binary logistic regression analysis: included in the final model, the following variables remained significantly associated with reporting if related symptoms of pneumonia. The age of the respondents, perceived reporting is very inconvenient and perceived confident to report or go to the clinic were positively associated with reporting if related symptoms. Older people were significantly more likely to report or go to the hospital if symptoms. Table 3 shows the adjusted odds ratios, the P value of reporting in the binary logistic regression analysis. Next, to assess the knowledge of students, we found a total of 94 participants (80%) who answered the utility to reduce assembly. Additionally, the vast majority 109 participants (91.6 %) agreed that wearing mask is useful. Of the result, 96 respondents (80.7 %) answered knowing the symptoms of COVID-19 and 105(88.2%) agreed that quarantine is necessary. Almost all of the respondents 113 (95%) think that regularly washing hands is useful. However, the study showed that poor knowledge was more apparent in response to questions regarding virus and the treatment methods. Many participants (more than 30%) incorrectly believed that the virus could be killed by drinking alcohol or smoking. It is noteworthy to state that this study did not find a significant association between knowledge and behavioral change.Based on the 80-100% correct answer for each question was considered as appropriate knowledge, and below 80.0% was considered as inappropriate knowledge. Figure 1 and table 3 describes the current status of COVID-19 knowledge among international students. Figure 2 displays the promotion of healthy behaviors, the cues that investigate whether or not students adopt a healthy behavior during the outbreak of COVID-19.

Discussion

To the best of our knowledge, there are no previous reports of similar studies, particularly none that examined the international students' knowledge and behaviors towards COVID-19, therefore we could not directly compare our results with those of other studies. Additionally, it should be noted that this study was conducted in the middle and early stages of the COVID-19 outbreak in China.Our study evaluated the knowledge and willingness associated with going to hospital or report if related symptoms of pneumonia among the international students still remaining in Heilongjiang during the pandemic of COVID-19 as well as the correlation between their behavior towards the prevention and control measure.The findings of this study showed good level of knowledge toward COVID 19. Moreover, as shown on figure   1 ,the most number of correct responses were gathered from the question about the symptoms of COVID -19 followed by the question on the maintenance of wearing mask and hand hygiene in the prevention of disease transmission. These finding were very encouraging as it is known that the lack of hygiene maintenance could lead to increase morbidity and mortality of deadly virus like MERS 12 .These results are in line with a study conducted in Henan which showed, 89% of health care workers (HCWs) had sufficient knowledge of COVID-19 13 .However many had inaccurate knowledge that smoking or drinking can kill the virus, indicating the need for behavioral change communications. Knowledge is the premise of establishing prevention belief, forming a positive attitude and promoting positive behavior. Individual's cognition and attitude toward disease affect the effectiveness of coping strategies and behaviors to a certain extent 14 .Poor knowledge can be considered as a barrier for behavioral change. This may explain the report refusal behavior by doing self-medication and withholding symptoms. One could also speculate that these results could be due to the media emphasis on symptoms and prevention in their awareness program. Therefore, greater awareness of COVID-19 myth busters is crucial. This again highlights the possibility that respondents were not thoroughly briefed about COVID-19 outbreak by the relevant authorities through the media or other channels of information easily accessible for foreigners including international students in China. Therefore, our findings were disappointing. Greater encouragement from health authorities is needed to assimilate COVID-19-related knowledge among students, including international students. This suggests tapping on the network of international students will be potentially a useful method in getting across awareness of COVID-19 prevention and control measure. Further studies are needed to elucidate these factors. Additionally, the results of this study indicated that the rate of adherence to preventive behaviors from COVID-19 was at a desirable level. As shown on figure 2 ,preventive behaviors such as observing the etiquette of coughing and sneezing, washing hands, declare if history of close contact or history of living in high risk area, wearing mask, avoid going to the affected area, have a good eating habit and work out were at proper levels. Similar results were highlighted by a study in Hong Kong which indicated that more than 77% of participants reported good health performance for COVID-19 18 .Furthermore we have applied the HBM to predict the likelihood of International Students to declare or undergoing for a consultation if symptoms of COVID-19. Significant differences were found among respondents in health beliefs, cues to action, self-efficacy, and paths influencing the likelihood to report or undergoing a consultation. We found that perceived susceptibility and barriers only for some items were significant. About 79.83% disagreed to be more susceptible to get infected. Unlike this study, wok et al.investigated the early stages of COVID-19 in Hong Kong and found that the individuals had higher perceived susceptibility and severity of COVID-19, so that 89 percent said that they were at risk for COVID-19 and 97 percent said that COVID-19 had severe symptoms 18 .According to the HBM, increased susceptibility to specific health problems will enable the behavior to reduce its risk of developing health problems. Individuals who think they are at low risk of disease are more likely to engage in unhealthy or dangerous behaviors. The combination of perceived severity and perceived susceptibility is called perceived threat and depends on knowledge of the condition 19 .The low level of self-perceived susceptibility (39.2%) in this study is a concern.This was not dissimilar to rates in a large pan-European study, where only 31% of the respondents believed they were at risk of contracting colorectal cancer( CRC ) 20 .A more impactful method may be through personal encounters for behavior changing.By discussing the paths of influence in this study, we found the determinants influencing the likelihood of report across the respondents. First, there were different direct or indirect paths of influence between perceived severity and the likelihood of declaring. Apart from being able to test whether one is infected as soon as possible, a more valuable benefit of timely reporting if symptoms of pneumonia, is that it helps to get an early diagnose and a quick recovery (P < 0.05). The likelihood of reporting was directly influenced by a high perceived severity, but also indirectly, because high perceived severity initiated high cues to action. Depending on the severity of the results, concealment of the disease will lead to the conviction of the offence of "endangering public safety by dangerous means" 5, 24 .Self-efficacy is an individual's perception of his or her ability to successfully perform an act 23 . This recognizes confidence in the ability to influence outcome change as a key component of healthy behavior change 23, 25 . This indicates the potential for health education programs to close the gap by developing effective strategies to persuade people to change their health beliefs, improve self-efficacy, and provide meaningful cues to action.This study adds to our understanding of awareness and promotional activities during pandemic events, which will have an impact on pandemic apprehension, knowledge and behavior.Furthermore, this study considers how health belief model construction during pandemic events can help identify and engage in population health promotion behaviors. It will be beneficial to repeat the survey in a few years' time, and review what effect these interventions have had practically on the international student's behavior during such situation.Despite of the study findings, we acknowledge its limitation. First, the student's willingness associated with reporting if related symptom may change with the course of the epidemic. A cross-sectional study is limited in its usefulness in capturing this type of dynamic change. Future research may consider a longitudinal design.Second, this study only analyzed the effects that socio-demographic characteristics and beliefs associated with reporting symptoms had on the willingness to report. There may be other factors affecting the student's willingness to report if symptoms of COVID-19. Third, considering the cost and convenience of conducting was conducted in the early days of COVID-19 pandemic in china, many student was repatriated to their country, hence the low number of respondents. Potential sample clustering and statistical errors due to multiple significance testing may limit the generalizability of the results.However, our study has several strengths .One of the strengths of this study is that it addresses a major health problem .Additionally it has highlighted the area where no research has been done. In fact this is the first study describing international students' knowledge and beliefs in the various behavioral components of the HBM amid the pandemic of COVID-19.The findings of this study would be critical to design effective control measures of COVID-19 in an outbreak situation.

Conclusions

Our study on International Students' knowledge and willingness to report if symptoms of COVID-19 showed the following findings. First, the level of knowledge is acceptable, however there is still room for improvement in certain areas. Second, the study showed an inclination to withhold symptoms, albeit in a small proportion (16.80 %) of the international student's .Considering that any incident of withheld symptoms can result in unpredictable outcomes, this finding demands attention. Moreover our study also indicated that the belief of the benefits of reporting symptoms, the severity of COVID-19, obstacles to reporting, and legal consequences of withholding symptoms would affect willingness to report. Therefore our findings have several important implications for epidemic control. It is necessary to intervene to increase the knowledge of international students toward COVID-19 and to promote the development of healthy behaviors. On the one hand, appropriate public risk communication and public advocacy strategies should be undertaken to assimilate COVID-19 related knowledge among students, to deepen understanding that symptom reporting enables individuals and others to be screened and treated for infections as early as possible and to alleviate fears that they may be isolated after reporting. On the other hand, in such crises, international students should not be left out, more attention, social support and social policies should be put in place. Our study on international students' knowledge and willingness to report if symptoms of COVID-19 showed the following findings. Firstly, the level of knowledge is acceptable, however there is still room for improvement in certain areas. Secondly, this study showed an inclination to withhold symptoms, albeit in a small proportion (16.80 %) of the international student's. Considering that any incident of withheld symptoms can result in unpredictable outcomes, this finding demands attention. Moreover our study also indicated that the belief of the benefits of reporting symptoms, the severity of COVID-19, obstacles to reporting, and legal consequences of withholding symptoms would affect willingness to report. Therefore， our findings have several important implications for epidemic control. It is necessary to intervene to increase the knowledge of international students toward COVID-19 and to promote the development of healthy behaviors. On the one hand, appropriate public risk communication and public advocacy strategies should be undertaken to assimilate COVID-19 related knowledge, motivation for appropriate practices and further improvement of attitudes towards prevention and control of COVID-19. Specifically, deepen understanding that symptom reporting enables individuals and others to be screened and treated for infections as early as possible and to alleviate fears that they may be isolated after reporting focusing the target audience in Heilongjiang thus suggested. On the other hand, in such crises, international students should not be left out, more attention, social support and public awareness campaign should be enhanced critically. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 

Ethics approval and consent to participate

This study was approved by the Research and Ethics Committee of public health college, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China (approval number/ID : HMUIRB20160014). All respondents received a first email before to answer the questionnaires, which described the goal and method of the data collection, how the data would be handled and also an assurance of confidentiality. All respondents who gave their informed consent 

Consent for publication

"Not applicable".

Availability of data and materials

The datasets used and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

Competing interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Funding

This study was funded by the Natural Science Foundation of China ( Research and Development Plan (Grants No. GA20C004). The funder of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report.

Author's contributions

OMY conceived the study idea and designed the study proposal. OMY collected the data, reviewed transcripts, coded, analyzed, interpreted the results and developed the manuscript. YL contribute to the conception and design of the study; ZS contribute to the conception and design of the study, LW contribute to the analysis, interpretation of data and revising it. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Authors' information

Omar 

Acknowledgements

We thank all international students for their contribution towards the survey. Variables in the Health Belief Model showed a significant association with behavioral change.

Author

Conclusion: From our study, we found that there is evident knowledge about COVID-19 among international students, although orientation and sensitization is still required. Those who were aware of the benefits of reporting, the severity of COVID-19 and the legal consequences of deliberately concealing information showed a greater willingness to report ; conversely, those who believed reporting is very inconvenient and feared being quarantined after reporting showed less willingness to report.A study focusing on international students' knowledge and behavior amid the pandemic will provide information for countries to cut off the chain of disease transmission of all variants of COVID-19.Keywords: COVID-19, Heilongjiang, withhold symptoms

Strengths and limitations of this study

 A cross-sectional study is limited in its usefulness in capturing this type of dynamic change. Future research may consider a longitudinal design.  The small sample size, considering the cost and convenience of conducting research, this study only selectively investigated one province may limit the generalizability of this study's findings. In addition, the small sample size limits the number of independent variables that can be included in multivariate analyses, and analyses were generally only able to detect large effects.  The urgency of the situation cause some limitations in the study. Despite the limitations, this study addressed a major health problem and highlighted the area where no research has been done. The findings of this study would be critical to design effective control measures of COVID-19 in an outbreak situation.

Background

The ongoing COVID-19 is a serious public health issue in the world. Consequently, the study of the spread mechanisms and prevention and control strategies of COVID-19 has become a global problem to be solved.Moreover, as has been demonstrated in previous pandemics, lack of proper knowledge about the disease is associated with negative behaviors among people, which can further complicate efforts to prevent the spread of disease. It is therefore imperative that communities be equipped with knowledge and healthy behaviors to limit the impact of COVID-19.With the deepening of China's openness and the "Belt and Road" policy, the number of international students studying in China has been increasing. As part of its socio-economic development, China has jumped from being the largest exporter of international students to the third largest recipient. Therefore when encountering public health emergencies, international students have become an important part of the community, and it is extremely important for them to effectively deal with the epidemic. In order to avoid cases of imported infections, schools banning students to return to China if they were abroad and those who remained in China should adhere to the epidemic prevention measures and have been asked , for an early detection of cases , to report daily if symptoms of COVID-19 such as fever, cough, runny noses etc. However, since the outbreak of the epidemic many international students did not cooperate with community epidemic prevention and control measures. As resistance to cooperation has grown, the Chinese authorities have taken more drastic control and preventive measures, including restricting the movement of people in cities and communities, rewarding those who provide clues to withholders and facilitating systematic and comprehensive searches through communities.In situations such as these, evidence based public health frameworks can provide a useful temporary measure.One such framework is the Health Belief Model (HBM). The HBM was originally developed to study why patients may not seek screening for tuberculosis, [1] , [2] and is one of the most prominent public health frameworks for understanding why individuals may or may not act in the face of a threat to personal or community health. The HBM has been used for decades to study vaccination, medication adherence, diabetes self-care, condom use, and other behaviors that require modification of a patient's actions to mitigate a threat to health. Broadly speaking, HBM believes that direct cues from an individual's beliefs and actions can guide behavior. Beliefs, in turn, are determined by one's background, including one's impressions of perceived threats, perceived benefits of taking action, perceived barriers to taking action and perceived ability to take action (i.e. perceived self-efficacy), [3] .Given all these concerns, the observance of preventive health standards and behaviors in society is essential to better control the disease. Numerous research studies are being conducted on COVID-19, but this article is the first to highlight this area. Additionally, a study focusing on international students' knowledge and behavior amid the pandemic will provide information for countries to cut off the chain of disease transmission of all variant of COVID-19. To our knowledge the Health Belief Model variables chosen have not yet been tested on the international students in Heilongjiang. We anticipate that our findings will explain factors that may contribute to a responsible preventive health behavior. Therefore, this study's goals were as follows: 1) to examine the level of knowledge of international students towards COVID-19 ; 2) to elucidate and analyze the student's beliefs associated with self-reporting if symptoms ; 3) to provide effective suggestions and measures for encouraging the students to report if symptoms of pneumonia. In addition, this study tested the following hypotheses: 1) perceived susceptibility and severity of COVID-19 infection will be positively associated with healthy behavior such as COVID-19 symptoms self-reporting; 2) perceived benefits of reporting symptoms will be positively associated with willingness to early report if related symptoms of pneumonia; 3) perceived barriers to self-report symptoms will be negatively associated with willingness to self-report. Heilongjiang province, is located along the northeast border of China. It covers an area of over 460,000 square kilometers, and has a population of 37.68 million. According to the department of education update, in 2019 Heilongjiang province accounted 13,429 international students. In March 2020, Heilongjiang had become the province with highest diagnosed patients in China (i.e. even worse than Hubei province). By March 11(2020) , according to the Chinese journal of Epidemiology a total of 482 domestic cases of COVID-19 was reported in Heilongjiang and most of cases were imported. The incidence rate of COVID-19 was relatively high and the early epidemic was serious in Heilongjiang, the number of cases was high in clusters especially family clusters, [4] . Due to these information, we selected Heilongjiang for this study.

Data analysis

Collected data were cross-checked and cleaned. Except for age all our variables are categorical and those with non-normal distributions were recoded. When quickly visualize the distribution, the graph is approximately bell-shaped and symmetric about the mean. Therefore we have proceed to a parametric test.Missing data were checked and none were recorded for variables.Once data collection was completed the questionnaire were reviewed to ensure that all quantitative questions were answered and that each question had no more than one answer unless stated otherwise. Data screening and verification were performed. Using the questionnaire guide, the data were then entered into SPSS (IBM, 2010). Data analyses included descriptive, Chi-squared test and regression analyses. First, descriptive statistics were used to summarize data collected for sociodemographic variables, COVID-19 knowledge and COVID-19 healthy behavioral. Percentages were calculated for these variables. Furthermore, frequencies were ran to examine the distribution of sociodemographic, reporting behavior and HBM items (e.g., perceived susceptibility, severity, benefits, barriers, and cues to action).Next, logistic regression analyses were conducted to determine the relationship between sociodemographic variables, HBM component and reporting behavior (will report/will not report).SPSS 20 was used to conduct the analysis. Statistical significance was set at P < 0.05

Domains of the HBM correlated with the willingness to go the hospital if related symptoms of pneumonia

Student's perceptions were collected and explained in the framework of Health Belief Model (HBM). Data has been collected based on the ranking from one to five (completely agree to completely disagree), and median ranks obtained using Friedman's test was used to divide the responses into two (agree and disagree) for easy description. Of the respondent, about 20% believed that they had some or high chance of getting agreed to report to the healthcare because concealing information will be punished by laws and regulations.Domain of self-efficacy showed that less than half (38.65%) of participants agreed to take the time to report to the doctor and 65.54% were confident that they will go to the clinic to report if symptoms discovered. In summary, the results indicated that most respondents had relatively high perceived severity, perceived benefits, cue to action and perceived self-efficacy, but lower perceived susceptibility and barriers. The correlation analysis indicated that all domains in the HBM except perceived susceptibility had significant effects on preventive behaviors from COVID-19 (p < 0.05). In other words, perceived susceptibility was not associated with reporting symptoms. In contrast, perceived severity were significantly associated with symptoms reporting. The results partially support hypothesis 1. The results of the test of hypothesis 2showed that perceived benefits were significantly associated with symptoms reporting. Similarly perceived barriers were significantly associated with reporting symptoms. Therefore, the findings provide support for hypothesis 2 and 3. 

Adjusted odds ratios, the P value of reporting in the binary logistic regression analysis:

Logistic regression analyses were conducted to determine the relationship between sociodemographic variables and reporting behavior (will report/won't report). Unstandardized regression coefficients (β) and odds ratios (ORs) were performed. Statistical significance was set to 0.05 or less and a confidence interval of 95% for all analyses. Binary logistic regression analysis considering behavioral change as outcome variable explains the role of HBM variables in terms of crude and adjusted Odds Ratios.As noted earlier, the sample size for this study was small (n = 119). Despite this limitation, the analyses helped identify factors that may be associated with perceptions of risks and reporting behaviors related to COVID-19. When all potential explanatory variables were included in the final model, the following variables remained significantly associated with the dependent variable. The age of the respondents, perceived barriers (reporting is very inconvenient) and self-efficacy (perceived confident to report or go to the clinic) were positively associated with the dependent variable (reporting if related symptoms). In contrast perceived benefit, perceived susceptibility and severity were not associated with reporting symptoms. Although these variables were not significant, the relationships are worth noting and perhaps need to be further examined with a larger sample.Thus, this study may help fill a significant gap in knowledge about barriers to COVID-19 reporting among international students and provides direction for future quantitative research with larger samples. Table 5 shows the adjusted odds ratios, the P value of reporting in the binary logistic regression analysis. Moreover, as shown on figure 1 , most number of correct responses were gathered from the question about the symptoms of COVID -19 followed by the question on the maintenance of wearing mask and hand hygiene in the prevention of disease transmission. These findings were very encouraging as it is known that the lack of hygiene maintenance could lead to increase in morbidity and mortality of deadly virus like MERS, [6] .These results are in line with a study conducted in Henan which showed that 89% of health care workers (HCWs) had sufficient knowledge of COVID-19, [7] . However, many had inaccurate knowledge that smoking or drinking can killed the virus, indicating the need for behavioral change communication.Knowledge is the premise of establishing prevention belief, forming a positive attitude and promoting positive behavior. Individual's cognition and attitude toward the disease affected the effectiveness of coping strategies and behaviors to a certain extent, [8] . Poor knowledge can be considered as a barrier for behavioral change. This may explain the report refusal behavior by resorting to self-medication and symptoms concealment. One could also speculate that these results may be due to the media emphasis on symptoms and prevention in their awareness program. Therefore, greater awareness of COVID-19 myth busters is crucial.This again highlights the possibility that respondents were not thoroughly briefed about COVID-19 outbreak by the relevant authorities through the media or other channels of information easily accessible for foreigners including international students in China. Therefore, our findings were a bit disappointing. Greater encouragement from health authorities is needed to assimilate COVID-19-related knowledge among students.This suggests tapping on the network of international students will be a potentially useful method in getting Furthermore, a proportion of 16.80% refused to declare if symptoms of pneumonia are discovered, although the majority agreed to report. Nonetheless, considering that any undetected case can result in unpredictable outcomes, this result already deserves great attention, [9] [10] [11] .In addition, the results of this study indicated that the rate of adherence to preventive behaviors from COVID-19 was at a desirable level. As shown in figure 2 , preventive behaviors such as observing the etiquette of covering the nose or mouth while coughing and sneezing, washing hands, declare if having history of close contact with infected persons or history of living in high risk area, wearing a mask, avoid going to the affected area, having a good eating habit and work out were at proper levels. Similar results were highlighted by a study in Hong Kong which indicated that more than 77% of participants reported good health status for COVID-19, [12] .Also, we applied the HBM to predict the likelihood of international students to declare or going for consultation if there are symptoms of COVID-19. Significant differences were found among respondents in health beliefs, cues to action, self-efficacy, and paths influencing the likelihood to report or undergoing a consultation. We found that perceived susceptibility and barriers only for some items were significant. About 79.83% disagreed to be more susceptible to get infected. Unlike this study, wok et al. investigated the early stages of COVID-19 in Hong Kong and found that the individuals had higher perceived susceptibility and severity of COVID-19, so that 89% said that they were at risk for COVID-19 and 97% said that COVID-19had severe symptoms, [12] . According to HBM, increased susceptibility to specific health problems will enable the behavior to reduce its risk of developing health problems. Individuals who think they are at low risk of disease are more likely to engage in unhealthy or dangerous behaviors. The combination of perceived severity and perceived susceptibility is called perceived threat and depends on knowledge of the condition, [13] . The low level of self-perceived susceptibility (39.2%) in this study is a concern. This was not dissimilar to rates in a large pan-European study, where only 31% of the respondents believed they were at risk of contracting colorectal cancer( CRC ), [14] . A more impactful method may be through personal encounters for behavior changing.By discussing the paths of influence in this study, we found the determinants influencing the likelihood of report across the respondents. First, there were different direct or indirect paths of influence between perceived severity and the likelihood of declaring. Apart from being able to test whether one is infected as soon as possible, a more valuable benefit of timely reporting if symptoms of pneumonia is discovered, is that it helps to get an early diagnose and a quick recovery (P < 0.05). Therefore, all individuals, including international students, must comply with the epidemiological measures implemented by disease prevention and control institutions and provide relevant information truthfully.Depending on the severity of the results, concealment of the disease will lead to the conviction of the offence of "endangering public safety by dangerous means", [17-19]. Self-efficacy is an individual's perception of his or her ability to successfully perform an act, [18] . This produced confidence in the ability to influence outcome change as a key component of healthy behavior change, [18] [19] [20] . This indicates the potential for health education programs to close the gap by developing effective strategies to persuade people to change their health beliefs, improve self-efficacy, and provide meaningful cues to action.This study adds to our understanding of awareness and promotional activities during pandemic events, which will have an impact on pandemic apprehension, knowledge and behavior.Furthermore, this study considers how health belief model construction during pandemic events can help identify and engage in population health promotion behaviors. It will be beneficial to repeat the survey in a few years' time, and review what effect these interventions have had practically on the international student's behavior during such situation.Despite this study's findings, we acknowledge its limitation. Firstly, the student's willingness associated with reporting if related symptom may change with the course of the epidemic. A cross-sectional study is limited in its usefulness in capturing this type of dynamic change. Future research may consider a longitudinal design. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y Secondly, this study only analyzed the effects that socio-demographic characteristics and beliefs associated with reporting symptoms had on the willingness to report. There may be other factors affecting the student's willingness to report if symptoms of COVID-19. Thirdly, considering the cost and convenience of conducting research, this study only selectively investigated one province. For more universal results, a study on a larger scale may be necessary. Fourth, the urgency of the situation caused some limitations to the study. The survey was conducted in the early days of COVID-19 pandemic in china, many student were repatriated to their country, hence the low number of respondents. Potential sample clustering and statistical errors due to multiple significance testing may limit the generalizability of the results.However, this study has added to the current knowledge of COVID-19. One of the strengths of this study is that it addresses a major health problem. In addition, it has highlighted an area where no research has been done. In fact this is the first study describing international students' knowledge and beliefs in the various behavioral components of the HBM amid the pandemic of COVID-19. The findings of this study would be critical to design effective control measures of COVID-19 in an outbreak situation..

Study design 4

After conducting the necessary literature research and receiving expert advice, we developed a self-administered questionnaire (supplementary file 1). To confirm the effectiveness of the questionnaire, we invited experts from fields such as health emergency, epidemiology, and public psychology, as well as three health administration workers who are currently in charge of epidemic prevention and control, to engage in two rounds of reviews of the questionnaire. They responded to the entire questionnaire and again two weeks later. The data obtained was not used for the final analysis. This questionnaire included the following parts: (1) Sociodemographic information; (2) knowledge of respondents; (3) Willingness and beliefs associated with reporting symptoms; (4) possibility investigation of healthy behaviour. The dependent variable in this study was the respondents' self-rated willingness to report if related symptoms of pneumonia, which was evaluated by the item: 'If related symptoms occur, how likely are you to report or go to a designated medical institution?' using a five-point Likert scale ranging from 1 to 5 (definitely would not report, would not report, unsure, would report, definitely would report).During analysis, for the purpose of comparing, respondents who had a positive willingness toward reporting with those who did not, we sorted those who selected 4 and 5 into the category 'report', and those who selected 1, 2, and 3 into the category 'not report'.Socio-demographic data were collected, including the respondents' gender, age, education level, if medical student or not, marital status, living arrangement, and 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y 3 religious belief. Among them, the religious belief data was obtained by the item: 'Do you have a religion', using yes or no as the answer option.The questions that address the knowledge of students as well as the HBM components for the current study were adapted from the information available in published articles.The level of knowledge regarding COVID-19 of the international students was assessed in which yes, no or don't know option was given against each set of question. Additionally a Likert scale were used to which they indicated their degree of agreement by selecting a rating between 1 and 5. For data analysis, only yes and no responses were examined.Based on the 80-100%, correct answer for each question was considered as appropriate knowledge, and below 80.0% was considered as inappropriate knowledge.Similarly, Healthy behaviour were also categorized.The respondents' beliefs associated with reporting symptoms was assessed through the construct of Health Belief Model (HBM), to which they indicated their degree of agreement by selecting a rating between 1 (strongly disagree) and 5 (strongly agree).To test the internal consistency of the HBM components, Cronbach's alphas were computed for each subscale.In the questionnaire, we also designed items to investigate healthy behaviour which would promote respondents to report, in other words the likelihood of respect of the prevention and control measures. We investigated healthy behaviour in which Yes or 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 The respondents' beliefs associated with reporting symptoms was assessed through the construct of Health Belief Model (HBM), to which they indicated their degree of agreement by selecting a rating between 1 (strongly disagree) and 5 (strongly agree).To test the internal consistency of the HBM components, Cronbach's alphas were computed for each subscale.In the questionnaire, we also designed items to investigate healthy behaviours which 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 Once data collection was completed the questionnaire were reviewed to ensure that all quantitative questions were answered and that each question had no more than one answer unless stated otherwise. Data screening and verification were performed.Using the questionnaire guide, the data were then entered into SPSS. Data analyses included descriptive, Chi-squared test and regression analyses. Variables with nonnormal distributions were recoded.The dependent variable in this study was the respondents' self-rated willingness to report if related symptoms of pneumonia, which was evaluated by the item: 'If related symptoms occur, how likely are you to report or go to a designated medical institution?' using a five-point Likert scale ranging from 1 to 5 (definitely would not report, would not report, unsure, would report, definitely would report). During analysis, for the purpose of comparing, respondents who had a positive willingness toward reporting with those who did not, we sorted those who selected 4 and 5 into the category 'report', and those who selected 1, 2, and 3 into the category 'not report'.Statistical methods 12 (a).First, descriptive statistics were used to summarize data collected for sociodemographic variables. Percentages were calculated for socio demographic information. Furthermore, frequencies were ran to examine the distribution of sociodemographic, reporting behavior and HBM items 6 (e.g., perceived susceptibility, severity, benefits, barriers, and cues to action).Next, logistic regression analyses were conducted to determine the relationship between sociodemographic variables, HBM component and reporting behavior (will report/will not report).SPSS 20 (IBM, 2010) was used to conduct the analysis. Statistical significance was set at P < 0.05 (b) N/A (c) Missing data were checked and none were recorded for variables.(d) N/A (e) The small sample size limits the number of independent variables that can be included in multivariate analyses, and analyses were generally only able to detect large effects.

Results

(a) Only international students located in Heilongjiang during the pandemic were considered eligible to take part in this study. Finally 119 participants were included in this study. Sociodemographic and reporting Behaviour: A proportion of 16.80% of the respondents chose not to report when they had related symptoms of pneumonia, and 83.19% chose to report. 18.08% of men chose not to report, which was higher than that of women (12%). Respondents aged 21 to 30 had the highest non-reporting rate (12.79%). In terms of education level, the proportion of people who chose not to report was the highest among those with master degree and above (18.68%), but the lowest among those with high school and below(18.68%). Single respondents had a higher percentage of non-reporter (20.48%) than married. The proportion of people who chose not to report among the respondents living with others (33.33%) was higher than living alone (17.64%) and living with family or friends (18.18%).Participants' Knowledge of COVID-19: to assess the knowledge of students, we found a total of 94 participants (80%) who answered it is useful to reduce assembly.Additionally, the vast majority 109 participants (91.6 %) agreed that wearing mask is useful. Of the result, 96 respondents (80.7 %) answered knowing the symptoms of COVID-19 and 105 (88.2%) agreed that quarantine is necessary. Almost all of the respondents 113 (95%) think that regularly washing hands is useful. However, the study showed that poor knowledge was more apparent in response to questions regarding virus and the treatment methods. Many participants (more than 30%)incorrectly believed that the virus could be kill by drinking alcohol of smoking). It is noteworthy to state that this study did not find a significant association between knowledge and behavioural change. In summary in the Chi square analysis, perceived susceptibility was not associated with reporting symptoms. Although these variables were not significant, the relationships are worth noting and perhaps need to be further examined with a larger sample. In contrast perceived severity were significantly associated with symptomsreporting. The results partially support hypothesis 1. The results of the test of hypothesis 2 showed that perceived benefits were significantly associated with symptoms reporting. Similarly perceived barriers were significantly associated with reporting symptoms. Therefore, the findings provide support for hypothesis 2 and 3.Logistic regression analyses were conducted to determine the relationship between sociodemographic variables and reporting behavior (will report/won't report). Unstandardized regression coefficients (β) and odds ratios (ORs) were performed.Statistical significance was set to 0.05 or less and a confidence interval of 95% for all analyses. The age of the respondents, perceived barriers (Reporting is very inconvenient) and self-efficacy (Perceived confident to report or go to the clinic) were positively associated with the dependent variable (reporting if related symptoms).In contrast perceived benefit, perceived susceptibility and severity were not associated with reporting symptoms. Further a proportion of 16.80% was found to be resistant to declare if symptoms of pneumonia, although the majority agreed to report.Additionally, the results of this study indicated that the rate of adherence to preventive behaviours from COVID-19 was at a desirable level.Furthermore, perceived susceptibility and barriers only for some items were significant. About 79.83% disagreed to be more susceptible to get infected.The perceived severity was an important predictor of corona prevention behaviours.The proportion of the student that recognized these benefits demonstrated a greater willingness to report (P < 0.05).Moreover. International students with symptoms of COVID 19 would generally be subjected to the prevention and control process of quarantine after reporting, until the incubation period passes without incident. Fear of this has also become one of the factors that impact on the willingness to report.In investigating the cues that may encourage the student's reporting of symptoms , we found various types of effective cues, with the majority of respondents admitting to the effectiveness of hearing about cases where concealing the illness would result in legal liability demonstrated a greater willingness to report.

Limitations 19

A cross-sectional study is limited in its usefulness in capturing this type of dynamic change. Future research may consider a longitudinal design.The small sample size, considering the cost and convenience of conducting research, this study only selectively investigated one province may limit the generalizability of this study's findings. In addition, the small sample size limits the number of independent variables that can be included in multivariate analyses, and analyses were generally only able to detect large effects.The urgency of the situation incurs some limitations to the study.Interpretation 20This study adds to our understanding of awareness and promotional activities during pandemic events, which will have an impact on pandemic apprehension, knowledge and behaviour. Furthermore, this study considers how health belief model construction during pandemic events can help identify and engage in population health promotion behaviours. It will be beneficial to repeat the survey in a few years' time, and review what effect these interventions have had practically on the international student's behaviour during such situation.

Generalisability 21

The sample size, considering the cost and convenience of conducting research, this study only selectively investigated one province may limit the generalizability of this study's findings.Future research with the international students should examine the development of appropriate measures to address the gaps in knowledge and identify barriers to healthy behaviour for this population.Despite of the study findings, we acknowledge its limitation. First, the student's willingness associated with reporting if related symptom may change with the course of the epidemic. A cross-sectional study is limited in its usefulness in capturing this type of dynamic change. Future research may consider a longitudinal design. Second, this study only analysed the effects that socio-demographic characteristics and beliefs associated with reporting symptoms had on the willingness to report. There may be other factors affecting the student's willingness to report if symptoms of COVID-19.Third, considering the cost and convenience of conducting research, this study only selectively investigated one province. For more universal results, a study on a larger scale may be necessary. Fourth, the urgency of the situation incurs some limitations to the study. The survey was conducted in the early days of COVID-19 pandemic in china, many student was repatriated to their country, hence the low number of respondents. Potential sample clustering and statistical errors due to multiple significance testing may limit the generalizability of the results.

Other information

Funding 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60 

