Introduction:

The underground pipeline system forms a significant part of the infrastructure because it includes thousands of miles in the United States. Sanitary sewage collects wastewater from public and private users as part of wastewater infrastructure systems [1, 2] . Approximately 800,000 miles of public sewage pipes and 500,000 miles of private sewer laterals [3] . By 2032, 56 million people are expected to use centralized treatment plants [4] [5] [6] . Water supply and sewage water pipelines are essential for society's survival, and their security and efficiency are critical for human health and economic growth [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] . However, as illustrated in Figure 1 , a significant percentage of these essential systems are decades old and plagued by defects and inefficiency. Using risk-based asset management, the most critical assets to take the most efficient course of action are identified by prioritizing the highest risk of failure by considering all the parameters. Using the traditional method, the number of failures received by sewer management can increase rapidly, making pipe failure handling imperative. The hydraulic capacity of a sewer can contain the flow of sewage under typical operating circumstances and with suitably sized pipes. Abnormal flows (such as those generated by storms). However, spillover to the natural and manmade ecosystems will occur. Under typical flow circumstances, if the hydraulic capacity of the pipe is decreased by limitations in the pipe, this is known as a blockage or choke [12] . Defects at sewer junctions can have a substantial impact on the overall functioning of the sewage system. Groundwater infiltration is the most prevalent issue associated with joint problems. The origins of these abnormalities are unknown, and there is no way of knowing when they will occur [13, 14] . However, manually identifying and classifying those failures through pipe repair documents and extracting the information related to those pipe failures are challenging because they are voice-generated text or manually written by the inspectors by inspecting through CCTV videos. This manual process can lead to many more committed errors. CCTV inspection includes two major processes: on-site video collection and off-site video assessment, as shown in Figure 2 . NLP can be an efficient way of automatically extracting information from large-scale pipe repair documents. NLP is a computer-assisted approach for facilitating the processing of human (natural) language. NLP may be a research area developing techniques accustomed to analyzing and extracting valuable data from natural languages such as text and speech. Several NLP applications include language translation, information extraction, and opinion mining [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] . NLP methods are often divided into two main categories: (1) Rule-based and (2) Machine learning-based [20] . Systems that rely only on hand-coded syntactic rules are known as rule-based systems [21, 22] . As a result, their performance is underwhelming. Languages and linguistic grammars are unimportant in the ML-based approach [23] because patterns are often quickly learned from even unclear training examples because they outperform the competition. Nevertheless, NLP is a useful technique for extracting and processing information from natural language into a more organized format for study. NLTK systems may be automated to parse textual content and search for keywords and phrases to extract data using predefined computer algorithms. Basic NLP approaches given by NLTK, on the other hand, fail to extract meaning from a sentence or phrase. The following is how key phrase extraction may be expressed as a sequence labeling task. Predict a sequence of labels, one label for each word in the input, where each label is KP (key phrase word) or non-KP, given an input sequence x, where each x represents the input vector of the word (not key phrase word). The task formulation for sequence labeling considers the correlations between nearby labels. It enables the joint decoding of the optimal sequence of labels for the input sequence rather than decoding each label individually.Long Short-Term Memory Networks (LSTMs) are a form of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) that are meant to solve the problem of RNNs' gradient disappearing. Additional memory cells in LSTMs are used to store memories from long-distance phrases. Because LSTMs may store information from past sequence inputs in the current input state, they are useful. For temporal and sequence data applications such as speech recognition, language modeling, and translation, they have proven a natural option. An LSTM has three layers: an input layer, a hidden layer, and an output layer. The hidden state in a forward LSTM network only saves information from the past. We utilize a bi-directional LSTM network with a forward hidden layer and a backward hidden layer to capture information flow in both directions. The structure of a Bi-LSTM network is shown in Figure 3 the nodes in the hidden layer are linked, which is how long-distance information is kept in the matrix weights. Nowadays, text classification has been used for many different problems within pipeline construction: To classify construction documentation based on priority [24, 25] . To support field inspection and data extraction of the inspection [26] . An ontology-based text classification method is used to process job hazard analysis information [27] . The state of art NLP model fails to deliver accurate results due to the difficulty of correctly tagging sentences and extracting entities. This is because pipe repair documents contain structured and unstructured text formats on pipe present repair, previous maintenance, and care received. Different inspectors document pipe assessment data in the pipe repair recommendation without any general specifications and standard format. Structured data is generally parameters (e.g., age, year, age-grade). Compared to the structured data within the pipe repair recommendation report, the inspector often conveys contextual information of pipe repair, which can be helpful for final pipe rating.Wastewater pipe defect has a variety of symptoms. Symptoms are related to pipe internal or external characteristics etc. Pipe repair documents would be noisier for large samples, and a sophisticated Machine Learning approach would become more difficult to understand the text with a limited training set. Hence, feature engineering of data is essential. Feature engineering plays a critical role in many texts' classification approaches. Feature engineering involves selecting a subset of informative features and combining distinct features into new features to obtain a representation that enables classification. The text classification domain typically includes all specific termswords and concepts present in a text corpus. Even small corpora may possess tens of thousands of features, potentially requiring feature engineering for a given classification task. Domain knowledge is often used to guide the feature engineering process; for example, to identify notes that assert the presence of defects, experts manually define dictionaries of terms related to the defects, e.g., defects and location of defects. However, manual feature engineering may require considerable effort, and the selected features and feature groups are problem and domain specific.We propose a framework for the pipe defect rating model using the deep representation of entities using a knowledge base to reduce human efforts for the labeled data creation and feature engineering to address the above problem. The proposed framework utilizes the knowledge base lexicons for defect entities which will be used to identify the entities for the sentences from pipe repair documents. We use the pre-trained WordNet as deep representation features to eliminate the need for task-specific feature engineering for training machine learning models. To illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed model, we conducted empirical experiments on a real dataset from the Department of Engineering & Environmental Services in Shreveport, Louisiana. The advantage of WordNet features in the proposed framework. The remaining of the paper is shown as follows section 2 about the Methods and Materials. Section 3 contains the experimental results, Section 4 includes the strength and limitations, and Section 5 contains the paper's conclusion and future work.

Methods and Materials

We here describe the proposed pipe defect rating framework using deep representation with lexicon file. Figure. 4 illustrates the schema of the proposed framework. In the first step, a rulebased NLP algorithm and ontology are developed based on experienced expert knowledge inspector and then applied to non-labeled pipe repair documents to generate lexicon files. By doing so, we can create a large set of labeled entity training data quickly. The pre-trained word embeddings are used in the second phase to map each occurrence into a deep semantic vector representation, which is then used to train machine learning techniques utilizing the deep representations as input. Finally, we use the machine learning model that has been trained to extract information from unseen pipe repair papers. Finally, the collected data will be utilized to calculate defect ratings.The pipe defect rating is calculated by multiplying the risk factor score for defect attribute and their frequencies. Thus, the defect attribute indicates the risk factor in the pipe repair document. For instance, leakage and rupture could be identified as defects. However, the leakage causes more damage than rupture. Therefore, the leakage attribute plays a more critical than rupture in pipe defect rate calculation. These defect attributes can be used to calculate defect behavior, such as corrosion, leakage, rupture, no failure, etc. This enables the severity of all types of surface defects to be assessed quickly by knowing their axial extent and location. The pipe defect rating calculation is discussed in detail in section 2.4. For example, a general pipe repair document contains the following information, as shown in Box.1. Likewise, this assessment document includes the following information, as shown in Table 1 . 

Lexicon generation

Building a knowledge base, a relational database with inference rules, with information collected from documents and structured sources, is known as knowledge base construction (KBC). We have built knowledge bases for pipe defects. The creation of a general list of defect attributes is referred to as defect lexicon or seed words. First, we hand-picked a list of defects for inspectors from traditional sources. After manually selecting defect attributes, each attribute was expanded with the relevant noun, verb, and adjective where possible, e.g., leak, leaking, leaked. Then, we used a knowledge-based method for identifying the new defect attributes. Knowledge-based methods exploit available lexicographical resources such as WordNet or HowNet. By searching WordNet for synonyms and antonyms of a term created a lexicon [28] . According [29] , the closer two words are, the fewer iterations are necessary to identify the synonymous connection between them. The connection between terms in a knowledge base was employed in both investigations. As illustrated in Figure. 5, the basic technique in these systems is to use gathered seed sets of pipe fault terms and their orientations to expand this collection of defect characteristics by searching for synonyms and antonyms in a knowledge base. There were a lot of synonyms that were off-topic and unconnected. The nature of this problem was discovered after manual tracking of individual seed keywords and their synonyms revealed ambiguous synonyms such as homonyms and antagonyms and incorrect or fuzzily interpreted synonyms. We fixed the problem by making distinct blacklists for each synonym, including redundant, misunderstood, and fuzzily understood terms. Unnecessary processing of undesirable terms was avoided in this way.

Data Set and Annotation:

A total of 3100 pipe repair documents were extracted from the Dept. of Engineering & Environmental Services' approved database by removing records with insufficient and missing information for further analysis. There was no complete information related to defect location, so we removed 130 documents and finally had 2970 pipe repair documents. We have randomly selected 500 pipe repair documents for our model. We used 80 percent of the pipe repair documents as training data and 20 percent as test data to evaluate our proposed framework for defect rating, as shown in Figure. 6. The meaning of sentence and defect ratings can be interpreted in different ways by different inspectors. Manual annotation of pipe repair documents provided a gold standard to benchmark the proposed model for pipe defect rating. Standard documents are manually annotated for entities and pipe defect rating. Entities from the lexicon files that are used as the training dataset for entity extraction. The annotation processes are described in detail using the Web-based tool for NLP-assisted text annotation. First, two annotators manually mark the list of lexical units and corresponding elements(attributes) for each sentence based on their expertise and lexicon knowledge file, which we created in section 2.1 is shown in Figure 7 . Then, they will assign a defect rating using PACP Protocol to each record; the most used defect scale is the PACP Protocol manual and is listed in Table 2 . PACP protocol was established to provide a standardized way of documenting features and defects identified during the inspection. PACP gives wastewater professionals a way to classify, evaluate and manage inspection data. Later these ratings are used to evaluate our proposed framework for defect rating. A statistical measure of Cohen's kappa coefficient is used to find the agreement between the two-annotator called Inter Annotator Agreement (IAA), as shown in Table 3 . 

Entity Extraction:

We deal with unstructured pipe repair documents from multiple inspectors; we use manual rules to fix this problem. The aim of identifying sentences certain entities from the text which are used in defect rating calculations. We explained the main four entities in Table 4 . Entity Extraction aims to identify entity mentions in text and classify them into predefined entity types, as shown in Table. 4. For example, "Rupture" should be recognized as a defect. A graphical representation of the entity extraction is shown in Figure. 8.

Figure.8. Graphical representation of the overview of entity extraction

Firstly, we perform data preprocessing for our text from pipe repair documents. Data preprocessing is crucial when dealing with text data because text data is unstructured data and the interpretations of the documents by different inspectors. Next, we removed all special characters in the pipe repair documents (e.g., commas in a list). Misprint in our dataset included typographical errors (e.g., "Leaks" instead of "Laeks"), and NLTK handles correction of the spelling errors. We also performed boundary detection using Stanford parser's sentence detection since it is a reasonably accurate tool in NLP [3] . Our pipe repair documents consist of many negation statements (no leaks, no defect...etc.). To identify such terms, entity or sentences, we use Negex function [30] . Lastly, we implemented a Bi-LSTM neural network. We adjoined the output vector from both forward and backward sequences to obtain the final entity representation vector using the lexicon file we generated in section 2.1. Finally, we create the data frame for each sentence consisting of information's such as (defects, size of defect, location of defect and frequency of defects). Which we will use for defect rating calculation. The parameter settings for the entity extraction model are shown in Table 5 . 

Defect Rating Calculation:

The proposed defect rating calculation employs three aspects of within pipe repair document defect term frequency, the importance of a defect term and location of defect within the pipe is shown in Eq.1 to Eq.3Defect Rating = ∑ * * * Eq.1Location of defect plays an important role in defect rating. For locations, the weights are assigned based on the scores mentioned [31] . In a document, no location (Infiltration Running) may be found, or if the phrase refers to only one pipe, we choose wlocation = 0.9. If the phrase is referring to many pipes, we choose wlocation = 0.1. When no negation is found, wnegation = 1.0. Because the contextual referents of at least 10% of the discovered negations were discussing the issues caused by other pipes in this case, we set wnegation = 0.1. We combine expressions to get the frequencies factor wlevel · nlevel for each lexicon/term of frequency. nlevel is the number of terms that match the sentence in each frequency lexicon. We pick weights in the lack of better knowledge or outcomes w0 = 0.1, w1 = 0.25, w2 = 0.5, w3 = 0.75, w4 = 0.9 for the frequency levels. As a special case we set wnone = 0.5 and nnone = 1 such that if there isn't a frequency phrase that matches, ffrequencies = 0.5.If the number of frequencies of the word for a feature found = 0.5 \Else,Similarly, the symptoms factor is the sum of wlexicon · nlexicon for each symptom lexicon. We randomly choose wseed = 1.0, w1sym = 0.85 and w2sym = 0.35All the defects of the water pipes are seed words and have different levels based upon the defects in the pipes.Example:" Frequently, there is a leakage in this pipe." It consists of only one sentence, and the location factor is 0.9 because it has only one pipe. There is no negation in this sentence or phrase, so the negation factor is 1.0. The frequency term has a weight of 0.9 for w3(level 3), and it matches one time(frequently), so the frequency factor is 0.9. The symptom term (leakage) matches one time and has a 1.0 (seed term) weight, so the symptom factor is 1.0.Therefore, Defect Rating = 0.9 * 0.1 * 0.9 * 0.1 = 0.81.

3.Results and Discussions:

The proposed framework defect rating model was trained on the training subset, and the validation subset was used to tune the hyper-parameters. Finally, the trained models were evaluated on the test subset, and the model performance was given as follows. To test our defect rating model presented in Eq. 4-7, we utilized precision, recall, accuracy, and F1 score. For each pipe repair document, precision, recall, accuracy, and F1 score were assessed. For example, a defect rating must be correct for it to be considered accurate. To assess the models' performance, precision, recall, accuracy, and F1 score were calculated at the entity level (e.g., defect, defect size, number of defects, and defect location). For each entity versus the record level, where each record is examined independently, a precise match with the gold standard of hand annotated data is required. The proposed defect rating model achieved higher accuracy by 97.0%, 92.0%, 93.0%, 95.0%, and 98.0% for the defect rating 1, defect rating 2, defect rating 3, defect rating 4, and defect rating 5, respectively, as shown in Table 6 . After deep analysis on the results, we understood that misclassified records have complicated sentences which are very hard for model to understand and classify. Our results indicate that we can accurately calculate the defect rating with the help of the entity extraction model. However, the defect rating model struggled to accurately calculate defect rating pipe repair documents due to less defect attributes in pipe repair documents and high disagreement between inspectors who annotated pipe repair documents. 

4.Strength and limitation:

Our study is groundbreaking in several ways. To our knowledge, this is the first study to look at the validity of NLP for numerous defect entities while investigating pipe repair papers for defecting ratings. Secondly, NLP research in pipe repair documents concentrates exclusively on a single defect condition, such as leaks. With the help of lexicon generation using WordNet, we created a completed set of defect Lexicon. There are multiple drawbacks to our research. The current study has one limitation. We selected a small subset of pipe repair documents to validate our results near the beginning of the proposed framework within our prospective database.

Conclusions and Future Work:

The present level of sewage system management differs from city to city, resulting in variations in nomenclature, inspection, condition evaluation, and wastewater pipe record-keeping. To detect pipe repair documents and extract fault ratings, NLP is a reliable and accurate approach. We've fine-tuned our NLP approaches to improve their capacity to recognize rating information appropriately based on our findings. However, more study is needed to assess the applicability and validity of NLP approaches for trenchless or building projects.There is chance to improve our algorithm by collecting more pipe related lexicon terms to train our model for different defect ratings.. In this paper, we propose accurate detection of defect rating from pipe repair documents of different locations of Shreveport. This study used a real dataset from the Department of Engineering & Environmental Services in Shreveport, Louisiana, to determine the practical importance and usability of the work. Defect Rating extraction with high accuracy shows that the proposed study will help to make decisions for pipe repair documents. NLP programs can play a valuable role in extracting and process meaningful data. In the future, we would like to develop a framework that consists of data extractions of CCTV videos using Deep learning Algorithms and feed the data for assessing the Suitability of Trenchless Technologies by the Decision Support System for installing, replacing, or rehabilitating each pipe and to reduce the methods of costs and to evaluate all the 70 technologies and helps in selecting the appropriate techniques [32] [33] [34] . NLP applications may be beneficial in the construction sector, allowing for faster and more accurate analysis while decreasing or eliminating the need for manual reviewers. Importantly, real-time NLP algorithms may be employed in the pipe area to construct automated pipe repair tracking systems, ultimately increasing pipe efficiency through regular monitoring.

Abbreviations:

NLP: Natural language processing NLTK: Natural Language Toolkit

