INTRODUCTION

Since April 2021, several cases of diseases including myocarditis have been reported after having COVID-19 vaccination type mARN [1] , Most of myocarditis conditions were reported in young people, but to date, there is no proven causal link. We report the case of a young patient admitted with myocarditis complicated by cardiogenic shock in whom the etiology was related to the anti-COVID-19 vaccination type mARN.

CASE PRESENTATION

We report the case of a 14-year-old child, without any pathological history, admitted to the emergency room for extreme asthenia associated with a headache and fever reaching 40 C°, resistant to the usual analgesics. The initial examination found a conscious patient, without deficit, with a frank stiffness of the neck, hemodynamically unstable with a SBP ( systolic blood pressure) 80mmhg, and a DBP ( Diastolic blood pressure) 30mmhg, tachycardia at 132bpm, with coldness of the extremities, on the respiratory level the patient was polypneic with a FR at 29cpm and SpO2 at room air 90%. The clinical examination showed signs of right heart failure, including turgidity of the jugular veins and hepatomegaly, without skin signs in favor of purpura. The ECG showed sinus tachycardia without repolarization disorders, and the chest X-ray in front of the patient's bed showed an alveolar syndrome. It should be noted that myocarditis after vaccination is a rare event, and has been described in some vaccines such as the smallpox vaccine [8] . Concerning the vaccination against COVID-19, several reports were published in this sense, mostly after a mRNA vaccine [9] .Regarding the physiopathology, there is no causal link yet demonstrated, but it is already noted in Pfizer-BioNTech clinical trials that systemic reactogenicity and immunogenicity are increased after the vaccine, especially for the young people [5] , this reactogenicity is mainly made of extreme asthenia, myalgias, J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f fever, arthralgia or lymphandinitis [6] , and maybe the myocarditis would be explained by this reactogenicity situation.The symptomatology of myocarditis is varied, ranging from simple shortness of breath, chest pain, or dyspnea to the fulminant myocarditis, in which the patient comes with a shock that usually requires circulatory support with positive inotropes [19] . Regarding myocarditis after mRNA vaccination, according to the Center for Disease Control and Prevention it is recommended to monitor the signs within 7 days after vaccination [9] .The first steps in the diagnosis of myocarditis are the anamnesis and the electrocardiographic signs, which are generally non-specific, and which may show arrhythmia or repolarization disorders [11] . The biology may show an elevation of markers of inflammation including C-reactive protein, and an increase in the troponin levels, but it should be noted that a normal troponin level does not eliminate the diagnosis. Echocardiography is recommended in all patients suspected of having myocarditis, it helps us evaluate the regional and global function of the left ventricle, to estimate the ejection fraction, and it should be pointed out that a normal ejection fraction should not exclude the diagnosis of myocarditis [12] . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) remains the examination of choice for diagnosis, it allows a precise characterization of the myocardial tissue. The criteria lake louise is used to identify the type of myocardial damage [13] .The therapeutic management of myocarditis after COVID-19 mRNA vaccine is essentially based on two elements: the first is the management of the hemodynamic instability by vasoactive inotropes or circulatory support such as the extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), or the intra-aortic counterpulsation (IABP) in the fulminant forms [10] , the second is the management of the inflammation, corticosteroids and intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG) are used to limit the activation of the nonspecific J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f immune system [14] . For non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, it is recommended to not use them due to their detrimental action on the kidney, which may aggravate the heart failure by the significant hydro-sodic retention [15] .In our case, the hemodynamic instability was managed with vasoactive drugs only, and the use of corticosteroids alone was advocated to combat immune activation, and the evolution was favorable.The SCARE guildlines were used in the writing of this paper [16] .

CONCLUSION

Given the seriousness of this disease, which can be fatal in its fulminant form, further research on the causal links between myocarditis and mRNA type COVID-19 vaccination is needed , especially in view of the large number of cases reported.

Conflicts of interest

The authors state that they have no conflicts of interest for this report Ethical Approval The ethical committee approval was not required give the article type case report. However, the written consent to publish the clinical data of the patients were given and is available to check by the handling editor if needed.

Sources of funding

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

Consent

Written informed Consent was obtained from the child's parents for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal on request.J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f

Provenance and peer review

Not commissioned, externally peer reviewed

