

).

Discussion

The vaccine BNT162b2, a lipid nanoparticle-formulated-nucleoside-modified RNA encoding the SARS-CoV-2 full-length spike, is the first COVID-19 vaccine approved by the FDA. The most common side effects are tiredness, headache, muscle pain, chills, fever, nausea and pain, swelling or redness at the site of injection. [3] . In these cases, the patients developed symptoms between 3 and 21 days after vaccination.Fowler et al. reported the case of young male who presented with unilateral CSCR three days after the first injection of a COVID-19 vaccine [4] . In this case CSCR resolved in three months. The authors did not specify whether the patient received a second injection. Our patient received a second injection which did not increase the subretinal fluid but which may have contribute to persistence of subretinal fluid.Many ocular findings associated with COVID-19 vaccinations were reportedincluding abducens nerve palsy, corneal graft rejection, superior ophthalmic vein thrombosis, Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease reactivation, uveitis, central serous chorioretinopathy and onset of Graves' disease [5] .Because millions of people are now being vaccinated against COVID-19, events will start to appear in reports. Given that vaccine induced ocular phenomena have been established with many other vaccines, COVID-19 vaccinations should not be exempt. We acknowledge that it is not possible to confirm a causative link between CSCR and COVID-19 vaccine. The relation between the first dose and the loss of visual acuity' time of onset, the low incidence of CSR (9.9 per 100,000 individuals) and our case's absence of risk factors for CSR development are strong argument for a causal relationship.The CSCR here reported might be considered as a rare ocular adverse effect of the COVID-19vaccine. The onset of ocular symptoms starting within seven days following vaccination suggests an autoimmune or inflammatory response to the vaccine. There remains a question of elucidating the mechanisms involved in a maladaptive immune response. It seems important for ophthalmologists to be aware of potential ocular side effects from COVID-19 vaccine.The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.

