

The COVID-19 pandemic is unprecedented in several aspects and has challenged the health care system. Till date there is no specific treatment available for the disease. COVID19 vaccines have been looked at to prevent disease severity. 4, 5 However, the emergence of mutant and virulent strains of the virus can impose challenge to the efficaciousness of COVID-19 vaccines. 6 Different health systems are trying to find out new or repurposed drugs to treat COVID-19 infection. 7 D. Silveira et al have showed that herbal medicines have better safety margin and enough level of potential evidence to be used as adjuvant in COVID-19. 8 Certain compounds like Curcumin have been postulated to be effective in COVID19 treatment due to its antiviral and anti-inflammatory properties and it's action at different levels of the viral infection. 9 Vigorous efforts are also being taken by the Department of AYUSH to find an effective herbal Ayurvedic intervention for both prophylaxis and therapeutic management.Cap. Torchnil and Tab. Febcin are 2 polyherbal proprietary medicines marketed by Dr. Palep's Medical Research Foundation. Cap. Torchnil has been in use for more than two decades to successfully treat recurrent pregnancy loss due TORCH infections and unknown etiology. 10 Cap. Torchnil h a s b e e n s h o w n t o inhibit the HIV Reverse transcriptase (RT) enzyme and P24 antigen in vitro a n d t h e activity of the herbal constituents were comparable with that of AZT and Lamivudine. 10 Tab. Febcin contains ingredients which are known to possess anti-inflammatory, immunomodulatory, antioxidant and antimicrobial (bacteria & viruses) properties. In-silico docking studies of different ingredients of Cap. Torchnil & Tab. Febcin were carried out against the corona spike protein to evaluate their ability to inhibit the active protein. The results showed that most of the ingredients bound to the spike protein of Covid-19 thus indicating that they could be used as treatment against the Corona virus. (data on file)The present study was thus aimed to assess the efficacy and safety of these 2 AYUSH interventions (Cap.Torchnil + Tab. Febcin) when given as add-on therapy in the clinical management of Covid-19 positive patients with moderate COVID-19 disease. Adult patients between 18 -70 years, proven to be positive for SARS-CoV-2 infection, as confirmed by the RT-PCR test 48 hours prior to the entry into the study and were admitted with moderate COVID-19 (as per MOFHW criteria) 11 for treatment at the hospital were enrolled after their written informed consent to participate in the study. Women were enrolled following a negative urine pregnancy test and only those patients who were able to consume the study drugs orally were enrolled.Patients suffering from any severe, uncontrolled medical disorder viz. Diabetes mellitus, secondary Hypertension, liver and/or kidney disorders etc, those with any medical or surgical condition that would require immediate medical or surgical intervention, patients having immunocompromised status like HIV, Hepatitis, Tuberculosis and Cancer, those on oral steroid therapy and/or any kind of immunosuppressive therapy, pregnant and lactating women were excluded from the study.Enrolled patients were randomised to one of the 2 study groups (1:1 ratio) based on a computergenerated randomisation The details of the role of each plant as per Ayurvedic textbooks with their quantity in the study drugs along with the package insert of the study drugs is appended as Appendix 1.The study medications were given only for 14 days, however the patients were monitored and followed up for a period of 3 months, i.e. 2 ½ months post stopping of treatment. Following discharge, the patients were requested to follow-up either physically or telephonically every 15 days till the end of the study. At every physical visit, the patients' vital signs and clinical examination was conducted and Sp02 levels were monitored. In case they had any symptoms suggestive of a repeat Covid infection, like fever, sore throat, cough, loss of taste and/or smell etc, an RT-PCR was done to rule out Covid 19 infection 3. Objectives:

Primary study objectives:

To confirm the efficacy of 2 AYUSH interventions (Cap.Torchnil + Tab. Febcin) when given add-on therapy in improving the clinical symptoms, reducing the duration to RT-PCR negative reports and confirming safety in patients with Covid-19 moderate disease

Secondary study objectives:

To confirm the efficacy of 2 AYUSH interventions (Cap.Torchnil + Tab. Febcin) when given add-on therapy in decreasing the need for oxygen supplementation and hospital stay in patients with Covid-19 moderate disease

Sample size:

Assuming a 15% difference between the AYUSH Interventions+SOC group & the SOC alone group based on previous data wherein in vitro evaluation of anti-HIV reverse transcriptase activity of Cap. Torchnil, showed that one of the constituents, Solanum xanthocarpum (Kantakari) gave the highest inhibition of about 37%, followed by Punica granatum (Pomegranate), -34% inhibition when compared to AZT (15%). Keeping the power at 80%, the significance level at 5% & the superiority margin (δ) at 7%, the sample size came to 140 completed cases with 70 cases in each group. Keeping the dropout rate at 10%, the sample size was estimated to 154 cases with 77 cases in each group

Statistical analysis:

Statistical analysis was done using ANOVA followed by posthoc tests for the parametric data and Kruskal Wallis test for non-parametric data. The level of significance for all analysis was taken as p<0.05.

Study Outcomes:

The study Outcome measures that were assessed during the study were as follows:

Primary outcomes:

To assess the proportion of patients who became clinically asymptomatic, Covid RT-PCR test negative J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f and those who worsened to severe stage of the disease during the hospital stay

Secondary outcomes:

To determine the changes in Covid associated serum biomarker levels, oxygen requirement from baseline to discharge and decrease in the duration of hospital stay

Assessment Parameters:

The following parameters were assessed during the study:1. Clinical COVID19 related symptoms 2. WHO Clinical assessment scale (from enrolment to discharge) 3. RT-PCR reports 4. Duration of hospital stay 5. Biomarkers: CRP, CPK, IL6, LDH, Ferritin, D-dimer (from enrolment to discharge) 6. Assessment of safety: hematological and biochemical reports and clinical adverse events.

Results:

Following ethical approval, the study was conducted over a period of 9 months from October 2020 to 

Demographic & co-morbid conditions details

The demographic details of the study participants showed that the average age of the study patients ranged from 43-63 years and that there was a similar distribution of men and women in both the study groups. The details are given in Table 1 below. Majority of the patients had underlying co-morbid conditions like controlled type 2 Diabetes mellitus, hypertension or a combination of both, details of which is given in Table 2 

Change in COVID19 related clinical symptoms:

At admission, most patients clinically had symptoms like fever, sore throat, difficulty in breathing, dry cough, nasal discharge, headache, loss of taste and/or smell, generalized weakness and GIT symptoms. The change in these symptoms were assessed for a period of 3 months on days 1, 7, 14, 30, 45, 60, 75 and 90. Clinically the symptoms were assessed as "Present" OR "absent" over the period of 3 months. As can be seen in Table 3 below, majority of the symptoms resolved or improved earlier in the Addon Group as compared to the SOC Group. The quicker recovery was statistically significant with regard to symptoms of headache and dry cough 

Loss of smell

Add-on Group (n=77) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 SOC Group (n=73) 4 0* 0* 0* 0* 0* 0* 0* Generalised

WHO Clinical Assessment scale

As seen in Table 4 , clinical improvement as per the WHO Clinical Assessment scale was seen in both the study groups, however the improvement was earlier in the Add-on group (Day 7) as compared to the SOC group with regard to decreased oxygen requirement and improvement in clinical symptoms although this difference was not found to be statistically significant. 3.42 ± 0.5

Changes in the vital signs monitored during hospitalisation

The vital signs of the patients in both groups were monitored daily during their hospital stay till they were discharged. There was a significant improvement in the pulse rate at days 10 & 14 as compared to baseline and days 1, 3 & 7 in both groups. The pulse rate in the Add-on Group was significantly lower than the SOC Group at days 10 & 14.A similar trend was seen with the respiratory rate and temperature readings in both groups. A significant improvement was seen in the respiratory rate at day 7 as compared to baseline and day 3 in the Add-on Group whereas significant improvement in the respiratory rate was seen at Day 10 compared to baseline and days 3 & 7. The respiratory rate in the Add-on Group was significantly lower than the SOC Group at days 10 & 14.With regard to the temperature, significant lowering of the temperature was seen at day 7 in the Addon Group & day 10 in the SOC Group. The decrease in temperature was significant from day 3 to day 14 in the Add-on Group as compared to the SOC Group. The results are summarised in Table 5 . 

Number of days wherein patients became Covid negative:

It was observed that patients who received the study medications became Covid negative earlier than those on SOC treatment. The mean duration for the RT-PCR negative report (COVID negative status) was 9.51±1.55 days in the Add-on Group as compared to 10.89±1.74 days for the SOC Group.None of the study patients had a worsening of their clinical condition during the hospital stay and there were no deaths reported during the study period.

Effect on serum Biomarkers levels:

As seen from Table 6 , an improvement in the serum biomarker levels was seen in both groups with a greater fall observed in the Add-on group. The fall in CPK, D-dimer and IL-6 values at Day 14 was statistically significant as compared to the SOC group whereas the fall in LDH levels was statistically significant at Days 7 & 14 in the Add-on group. 

Change in the requirement for supplemental oxygen:

It was observed that the average percentage of oxygen in the blood (Sp02) and oxygen requirements of the study patients improved during their hospital stay in both groups with the improvement seen earlier in the Add-on group though not statistically significant. The results are presented in Table 7 

Mean duration of hospital stay:

Patients in the Add-on group recovered faster and were discharged earlier as compared to the SOC group, though the difference was not statistically significant. The mean duration of hospital stay for the Add-on group was 11.4 days as compared to the SOC group (13.4 days)

Safety evaluation

Safety was monitored by clinical assessment and laboratory investigations. 2 patients from the Addon group refused further participation in the study due to complaints of hyperacidity after starting the IP. No major changes were observed in the laboratory safety parameters in both the groups. Following discharge, all the study patients were requested to follow up for a period of 2½ months to monitor their clinical condition and document any relapse or worsening of their Covid state. The patients followed up either physically or telephonically every 15 days till the end of the study. Of the 158 patients, 1 patient from the Add-on group and 7 patients from the SOC group were lost to followup post discharge as they went to their native place and were uncontactable inspite of repeated attempts to call them. Of the 150 patients who followed up, 49 patients from the Add-on group came for physical visits while 28 patients preferred telephonic visits. In case of the SOC group, 42 patients came for physical visits while 31 patients preferred telephonic visits. At every physical visit, the patients' vital signs and clinical examination was conducted and Sp02 levels were monitored, and RT-PCR done in case there were symptoms suggestive of a Covid infection.All 91 patients who came for the physical visit were clinically stable with no worsening of their clinical condition and no signs or symptoms suggestive of a repeat Covid infection. Their vital signs and Sp02 levels were within the normal range in both groups although the decrease in the pulse and respiratory rate at days 75 & 90 was statistically significant in the Add-on group as compared to the SOC group.(refer Table 8 ) Medicines from natural sources have always been intriguing to researchers to develop novel drug candidates and/or molecules especially for the treatment of diseases that have no cure in modern medicine. COVID-19 caused by the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) is one such infectious disease for which no specific drug or vaccine is available, yet. Historically, natural products and herbal medicines have been used for the prevention of viral infections and generally show favorable efficacy and acceptable toxicity. Thus, since the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak, various herbal medicines have been used for the prevention and treatment of the infection. 12 In our study, we evaluated the effect of 2 polyherbal proprietary medicines, Cap. Torchnil and Tab. Febcin containing a combination of different medicinal plants for their efficacy in the clinical management of Covid-19 positive hospitalized patients with moderate disease in addition to standard of care. The effects of these 2 medications were compared to that of standard therapy offered to these patients.Of the 160 patients with COVID19 infection of moderate severity included in the study, 150 completed the study duration. All these patients recovered from their illness while in hospital and were discharged with no deaths. Patients receiving the study medications showed a faster recovery with regard to their clinical symptoms with statistically significant improvement seen with regard to headache and dry cough. Symptoms like fever and sore throat too resolved within 7 days in the study group as compared to the Control group. This is possibly because of the anti-pyretic effects of Tab. Febcin which has been proven in a rat model wherein significant antipyretic action was observed as compared to paracetamol. 13 The average SpO2% levels showed an improvement from Day 1 onwards decreasing the requirement for oxygen from Day 10 in patients in the study group as compared to the Control group. With respect to the serum biomarker levels, an improvement in all the biomarker levels was seen in patients in the study group with a significant improvement seen for CPK, LDH, D-dimer & IL-6 levels, indicating anti-inflammatory effect of the study medications. The mean hospital stay duration was 2 days shorter in the treatment group (11.40 vs.13 .44 days) and as was the number of days to a RT-PCR COVID-19 negative report (9.51 days for the Treatment group as compared to 10.89 days in the Control group). All the above effects demonstrate that the study medications had antiinflammatory, antipyretic and possibly antiviral effect and/or immunomodulatory effect promoting an earlier recovery in patients who consumed the medications. Both the study medications contain various medicinal plants that are known to have anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory properties like Glycyrrhiza glabra, Tinospora cordifolia, Tribulis terrestris and Clerodendrum serratum, plants like Piper longum, Solanum indicus, Solanum xanthocarpus which are effective in respiratory illnesses and those with antipyretic properties like Fumaria parviflora, Fagonia arabica, Cocculus hirsutus and Andropogan muricatum. [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] In-silico studies have also shown that the 2 formulations when evaluated against the corona viral membrane protein for their inhibiting ability of the active spike protein showed that there was interaction between the different constituents with the different regions of the spike protein suggesting that the formulations would be functionally significant against the corona viral protein. (Unpublished data).The results seen with these 2 herbal formulations are similar to that seen with other herbal drugs used to treat COVID19 infection. AYUSH 64, which contains aqueous extracts of Alstonia scholaris (bark), Picrorhiza kurroa (rhizome), Swertia chirata (whole plant) and Caesalpinia crista was found to hasten recovery, reduce hospitalization and improve overall health when given to patients suffering from mild and moderate symptomatic COVID-19 along with SOC. 19 In silico docking studies to assess the potential mechanism of action of AYUSH-64 compounds against Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome-Corona Virus (SARS-CoV-2) Main Protease (Mpro; PDB ID: 6LU7) demonstrated that of the 36 compounds of four ingredients of AYUSH-64 screened, 35 exhibited good binding energies to the main protease with the best affinity and interactions seen with Akuammicine N-Oxide (from Alstonia scholaris). 20 Clinical trials of different AYUSH medicines like Ashwagandha, Yashtimadhu, Guduchi, Pippali on patients, health workers, and those working in high-risk areas were also initiated by the Ministry of AYUSH. In silico network pharmacology and docking studies carried out to explore the immunomodulatory and anti SARS-CoV2 potential of phytoconstituents from Ashwagandha, Guduchi and Shatavari against the Spike protein, Main Protease and RNA dependent RNA polymerase of the virus. The results showed that these phytoconstituents possessed good affinity for the three targets, suggesting their application for the termination of viral life cycle. 21 Different ayurvedic proprietary medicines like ZINGIVIR-H, Aayudh Advance, /Purified aqueous extract of Cocculus hirsutus (AQCH), a phytopharmaceutical, Amrta karuna syrup, Virulina®, Astha-15 were also shown to be effective in improving the clinical condition of Covid19 patients when given as add-on therapy through their immunomodulatory properties. 22 One of the limitations of our study was that the clinical symptoms were measured as ordinal data (Present/Absent) rather than using a VAS scale. This was done mainly to minimize the stress on the patients as initially many of them were on oxygen supplementation and also to restrict the length of contact between the patient and the study team member due to the Covid positive status of the patients.

Conclusion:

Thus, the results of the randomized, comparative controlled clinical study assessing the efficacy of a combination of Cap. Torchnil and Tab. Febcin in patients with moderate COVID-19 disease showed that these 2 formulations were effective when given as add-on therapy to standard of care. The formulations hastened clinical recovery, viral clearance, decreased oxygen requirements and lowered inflammatory biomarker levels suggesting that they have a role in the clinical management of COVID19 patients with moderate disease. 

SSBCTN taBLE?

Ayuruedic approach to control feuers of common uiral origin is uery interesting. Usually feuer starts with prodromal symptoms of malaise, body aches and pains, nausea and uomiting. These symptoms signify ouerload on liuer due to protein breakdown occurring in feuer.Ayurued.ic approach is to reduce the burden on the liuer by fasting and hydration with lukewarm water and giue herbs to reduce feuer and other syrnptoms. These herbs are basically stimulant of liuer function, soothening the stornach and improue the appetite. These herbs also help in bringing down the temperature.In contrast a mod.ern medicine practitioner treats fever with paracetamol (PCM), a known hepatotoxic drugs. PCM is sd.uised after food add.ing more load of amino acids on liver.Herce o formulation based on Ayurueda is created in the form of FEBCIN tablets. 

