| INTRODUC TI ON

Several investigators have evaluated whether preterm birth rates have changed during the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID- 19) pandemic compared with historical cohorts. [1] [2] [3] [4] These studies have focused on the impact of mitigation measures such as lockdowns and disruptions in the provision of healthcare services. A recent meta-analysis concluded that the pandemic was associated with a 9% decline in the preterm birth rate in high-income countries, but no change was seen elsewhere. 5 Fewer studies have attempted to ascertain whether actual infection with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) affects the risk of preterm birth.

Publications by the USA Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

(CDC) have reported an increased frequency of preterm birth among pregnant women with SARS-CoV-2 infection compared with national averages. 6, 7 A limitation of these and other large registry studies is that they do not compare pregnancy outcomes with those of patients without infection from the same populations and time period. 8 Thus, any increase in preterm birth attributed to viral infection is speculative. Furthermore, some of these studies are vulnerable to selection bias by over-inclusion of symptomatic cases with more severe illness. Notably, the CDC publication by Woodworth et al confirmed that asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection in pregnancy constituted less than 10% of the cases in their sample. 6 Using universal testing protocols, multiple studies have demonstrated that the majority of pregnant patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection are asymptomatic. 9, 10 To date, studies directly evaluating the effect of SARS-CoV-2 infection on preterm birth are limited. 11, 12 What is needed are large studies that compare women with and without infection from the same populations and time period, and in sufficient numbers to adjust for severity of infection and known associations with preterm birth. Recently, a prospective multinational cohort study attempted to do this. 13 The authors concluded that preterm birth was increased only in cases of symptomatic COVID-19, but the study had several limitations that we subsequently review.The objective of our study was to determine whether preterm birth, spontaneous preterm birth, or medically indicated preterm birth occur more frequently in pregnant women with SARS-CoV-2 infection compared with those without infection in a large integrated health system in New York with a universal testing protocol. We aim to clarify whether disease severity or resolved prenatal infection is associated with these outcomes, and whether results were different between the first and second waves of the pandemic.

| MATERIAL AND ME THODS

This retrospective cohort study evaluated data from seven hospitals in New York City and Long Island between March 15, 2020 and June 28, 2021, incorporating both the first and second waves of the pandemic in the USA. The first wave started in March 2020 and peaked in April 2020. The second wave started in November 2020 and peaked in January 2021. All patients with live singleton gestations who underwent SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing during their delivery hospitalization were included. Patients who were evaluated at the hospital but sent home without admission were not included unless they subsequently delivered during the study period. Deliveries that occurred at less than 20 weeks of gestation were excluded. Universal PCR testing was implemented in April 2020. As a result of limited testing capabilities in March and early April, only symptomatic patients, and those with known or suspected exposure to the virus, received PCR testing. Serological testing for antibodies to the virus was also offered starting in June 2020. Antibody results after December 2020 were not evaluated in this study because of the widespread availability of SARS-CoV-2 vaccination, which induces a similar immune response.Clinical data were obtained from the enterprise electronic health record system (Sunrise Clinical Manager; Allscripts). Data collected included patient demographic information, clinical characteristics, and pregnancy outcomes, including gestational age at delivery. Self-reported race and ethnicity data were collected from preterm birth occurred more frequently during the second wave compared with the first wave (13.6% vs. 8.7%, respectively; p < 0.006). However, this was not significant on multiple regression analysis after adjusting for other explanatory variables.Conclusions: Pregnant women with symptomatic COVID-19 are more than twice as likely to have a preterm delivery than patients without infection. Asymptomatic infection and resolved prenatal infection are not associated with increased risk.

| 2255

BLITZ eT aL. prespecified categories. Participants' records were manually reviewed to categorize preterm births as spontaneous or medically indicated. Spontaneous preterm birth was defined as resulting from preterm labor, preterm prelabor rupture of membranes, or cervical insufficiency. Cervical insufficiency was defined as painless cervical dilation, without contractions or labor, resulting in either secondtrimester delivery or cerclage placement. Medically indicated preterm birth was defined as being initiated by a clinician based on a maternal, fetal, or placental/uterine condition. 14 If there were characteristics of both categories, the primary factor driving the timing of delivery was used. Records were also manually reviewed to classify severity of illness for patients with positive SARS-CoV-2 PCR testing using the National Institutes of Health severity of illness categories. 15 Patients who reported no symptoms consistent with SARS-CoV-2 infection during their hospitalization were considered asymptomatic. Mild illness was defined as having various signs and symptoms of COVID-19 (eg fever, cough, sore throat, malaise, headache, loss of taste and smell) but without shortness of breath, dyspnea, or abnormal chest imaging. Moderate illness consisted of lower respiratory disease but oxygen saturation that remained at 94% or more on room air. Severe illness had an oxygen saturation below 94% on room air, ratio of arterial partial pressure of oxygen to fraction of inspired oxygen (Pao 2 /Fio 2 ) less than 300 mm Hg, respiratory frequency more than 30 breaths/minute, or lung infiltrates more than 50%. Critical illness was defined by respiratory failure, septic shock, and/or multiple organ dysfunction.The rate of preterm birth (before 37 weeks of gestation) was determined for patients with positive and negative SARS-CoV-2 test results. Results from the first and second waves of the pandemic were compared. The analysis was performed separately for resolved prenatal infections and infections at delivery, with the latter group subdivided by symptom status. Infection at delivery is based on positive SARS-CoV-2 PCR testing during delivery hospitalization. Resolved prenatal infection was defined as negative SARS-CoV-2 PCR testing at delivery and either positive immunoglobulin G antibody testing or previous positive PCR testing. Negative for resolved prenatal infection is based on negative antibody testing at delivery and the absence of positive PCR testing. Symptom data were not collected for patients with resolved SARS-CoV-2 infection because it was not consistently documented, and was more prone to recall bias.Descriptive statistics were used to characterize the data.Categorical variables were expressed as frequency and percentage. Each categorical outcome was examined using the chi-squared test or Fisher's exact test, as appropriate. Comparisons for continuous variables were performed using either the Mann-Whitney U test or Student's t test, as appropriate. Simple and multiple logistic regression analyses were used to examine the association between SARS-CoV-2 infection and preterm birth, adjusting for the following variables: maternal age, race-ethnicity, parity, history of preterm birth, body mass index, marital status, insurance type, chronic hypertension, diabetes (gestational or pregestational), asthma or other chronic pulmonary disease, hypertensive disorders of pregnancy (including gestational hypertension, preeclampsia, HELLP syndrome, eclampsia), month of delivery, and wave of pandemic. We adjusted for month of delivery (March 2020 to June 2021) to account for whether clinical management changed from the early months of the pandemic to the later months, and because previous studies have observed seasonal patterns in preterm birth. 16, 17 We adjusted for wave of pandemic because there may be factors associated with the second wave, which began in November 2020, that affect the outcome 

| Ethical approval

The Northwell Health Institutional Review Board approved this study as minimal-risk research using data collected for routine clini- Table 1 .A total of 2473 pregnant patients (7.8%) had laboratory-confirmed infection: 1261 at delivery and 1212 resolved before delivery ( Abbreviations: PCR, polymerase chain reaction; SARS-CoV-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2. a Self-reported race and ethnicity data were collected from prespecified categories on hospitalization.b Infection at delivery is based on positive SARS-CoV-2 PCR testing during delivery hospitalization.c Resolved prenatal SARS-CoV-2 infection is based on negative PCR testing at delivery and either positive immunoglobulin G antibody testing (n = 1112) or previous positive PCR testing (n = 100). Negative for resolved prenatal infection is based on negative antibody testing at delivery (n = 8440). d Symptomatic patients met criteria for mild, moderate, severe or critical illness using NIH COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines (https://www.covid 19tre atmen tguid elines.nih.gov). e Calculated using two-tailed chi-squared test.f Denominator for spontaneous preterm birth rate excludes medically indicated preterm births.g Denominator for medically indicated preterm birth rate excludes spontaneous preterm births. Our study also has limitations, including its retrospective design and the uncertain timing and severity of infection among the group with resolved prenatal infection. We cannot exclude the possibility of antibody waning affecting our results. Nevertheless, inclusion of such women further demonstrates that most SARS-CoV-2 infections in pregnancy are not associated with preterm birth.

| CON CLUS ION

This study found that symptomatic COVID-19 in pregnancy is associated with an increased risk for medically indicated but not spontaneous preterm birth. The risk of preterm birth was unchanged in patients with resolved prenatal infection and asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection when compared with women without infection.

ACK N OWLED G EM ENTS

We thank Fernando Suarez and Shreya Sanghani for assistance with clinical data retrieval.

CO N FLI C T O F I NTE R E S T

None. 

