Introduction

The current COVID-19 outbreak is due to the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 that originated in the area of Wuhan, Hubei province, in China 4,5 . On March 11, COVID-19 was officially declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization (WHO), as it spread extremely rapidly since December 2019, following an exponential curve worldwide 6 . As of April 20, the pandemic provoked more than 2.4 million diagnosed infections worldwide, and at least 170,000 deaths 3 .The health, social and economic consequences of this pandemic are huge 7 , with more than three billion humans under different regimes of containment at the beginning of April 2020. If most of the infections occur in the northern hemisphere, the southern hemisphere is not spared by the disease, despite the summer season. Indeed, many viral respiratory infections show seasonal fluctuation, especially in temperate regions 8, 9 . Air temperature and humidity have been shown to influence the spread of influenza viruses 10 , as well as the coronaviruses SARS-CoV 11 , responsible of the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and MERS-CoV 12 , responsible of the Middle East respiratory syndrome.. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.

(which was not certified by peer review)

The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 20.20072934 doi: medRxiv preprint One debated question about COVID-19 is whether its spread is being affected by season-related climatic factors, as are other seasonal viruses 2 . This is of utmost importance, as the possible climatic dependency of COVID-19 could help decision-makers to adopt the most suitable strategy to control the disease in the near future. There are several recent studies that have tackled this question since the onset of the COVID-19 outbreak, available on online archive repositories. As for other viruses, temperature and humidity seem to be factors with some influence on the spread of SARS-CoV-2, but recent studies led to contrasting results. In general, a negative relationship is found between air temperature and the spread of SARS-CoV-2 virus 13, 14 , but a positive one 15 and a lack of effect 16 have also been reported. In the case of humidity, limited 17, 18 , positive 19 and negative 13 effects on the infection rate have been reported. Almost all of those studies were restricted to data from China at the early stage of the epidemic. The few exceptions 13, 18, 19 considered up to 47 countries, but the time frame was limited at a maximum to February the 29 th and these studies were based on the number of COVID-19 confirmed positive cases, which is unevenly assessed among countries.To analyse the potential effects of climatic factors on the COVID-19 pandemic, an accurate descriptor of the outbreak that can be compared among countries is needed. The main descriptors that have been used to date include the cumulative number of reported COVID-19 positive cases at a given date 20 , the daily number of new positive cases 14, 21, 22 , and the daily mean number of positive cases for a given time period 19 . Yet, these descriptors are all based on the number of COVID-19 positive patients, which in turn depends on the countries' screening strategies.As of 20 March, many countries were testing patients exhibiting clear COVID-19 symptoms, such as Italy, Spain, France, Belgium, Switzerland, the UK, and the USA. Other countries, such as South Korea, Singapore, Australia, United Arab Emirates and more recently Germany, have opted to screening their population more widely. It results that . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. countries performing more tests are either following a strategy of wide screening, whatever   the proportion of positive patients, or are having numerous patients with clear COVID-19 symptoms. These two contrasting situations lead to infection estimates that are hardly comparable among countries.To show that descriptors based on COVID-19 positive patients might be strongly biased when analysing data reported from multiple countries, we performed a correlation analysis between the mean maximum air temperature between mid-February and mid-March 2020 and the total number of tests performed per country, as of March 20. We found a strong negative correlation, where countries with lower temperatures tend to perform more tests (r = . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.20.20072934 doi: medRxiv preprint candidate models that can be built with combinations of the six variables according to their resulting weighted AIC (wAIC) 23 . We then computed a model average of all candidate models included in a confidence set of 95% (Swi ³ 0.95) (Table S1, Supporting Information).Very similar results were obtained with the temperature-based and the UV-based averaged models, yet with slightly higher significance values for the latter (Table 1) . Both approaches resulted in sets of best models explaining between 12% and 25% of variation in mortality rate by the fixed variables (R 2 GLMM(m), Table S1 ), and between 49% and 54% when considering both fixed and random variables (R 2 GLMM(c), Table S1 ). In these models, temperature and UV-index influenced negatively the mortality rate, while the opposite was observed for the relative humidity ( Fig. 1 ). All other explanatory variables also contributed to explain the COVID-19 outbreak. The proportion of the population older than 64 years old had a positive effect on mortality rate, while the number of beds in hospitals and the travel restrictions implemented in each country showed a negative effect ( Table 1 ).The results for the temperature-based averaged model showed that every extra degree Celsius decreases the mortality rate by 3.74% (e -0.04 -1, Table 1 ). The UV-based averaged model showed that every unit increase in UV-index results in a 14.72% decrease in the mortality rate (e -0.16 -1, Table 1 ). In this last model, humidity had a positive effect, in which every 1% increase of relative humidity results in a 1.85% mortality rate increase (e -1.85×0.01 -1, Table 1 ). Regarding the other variables in our models, every 1% increase in the proportion of the population older than 64 years old increased the mortality rate by 11.31% (e 0.11 -1, Table   1 ). Every extra bed in hospitals for 10K inhabitants decreased the mortality rate by 2.22% (e -0.02 -1, Table 1 ). Finally, strong and early governmental travel restrictions resulted in a geometric mean of mortality rate 61.8% lower than when restrictions were weak and imposed late (e -0.96 -1, Table 1 ). No effect is observed concerning intermediate timing and strength of governmental travel restrictions (Table 1) .. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.20.20072934 doi: medRxiv preprint mortality rates. Relative humidity is a third climatic variable able to explain a reduction in COVID-19 mortality rate when it is lower. We also show the importance of age class structure, access to healthcare systems and governmental travel restrictions in explaining the COVID-19 outbreak. Although our results may somewhat relieve some of the anxiety of people living in regions entering the warm season or living in warm countries, it is clear that climatic factors alone will not passively stop the outbreak. However, our results do represent a warning for the populations and decision-makers of countries with cold climates or moving towards the cold season. Importantly, the clear contribution of climatic factors on the COVID-19 outbreak, however, does not ensure that this disease will evolve into a winterseasonal epidemic viral disease like the influenza virus 29 . More research is urgently needed to better understand the dynamics of the COVID-19 pandemic in order to save lives.The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.20.20072934 doi: medRxiv preprint countries. We considered all regions registering at least 15 days of deaths until 6 th April 2020.The final dataset includes 208 territories in 88 countries.Climatic dataset. The historical weather conditions in each country or territory included in the COVID-19 dataset were obtained from the Dark Sky API dataset by using the R package "darksky" 30 . We considered the geographical coordinates associated with each record in the COVID-19 dataset. We included in the analysis the maximum temperature (°C), relative humidity, and UV-index. These variables were taken by day for the 15 days before and the 15 days after the first registered death in each country or territory recorded. We computed the average across these 30 days for each climatic variable. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. disease. Since temperature and UV-index are highly correlated (r ~ 0.9, p-value < 0.001), we included those variables in two separated models. We verified the collinearity among predictor variables by computing the variance inflator factor (VIF). All variables included in the separate models with either temperature or UV-index did not show collinearity with other predictor variables (VIFs < 1.6) 36 . We also estimated the effect of including a spatial correlation structure as well as the effect of the country-level as a random effect, following Zuur, et al. 36 . The model selection was based on the lowest Akaike Information Criterion value (AIC) 23 . The final model structure was a linear mixed model (LMM) that considers an exponential spatial correlation and country-level as a random intercept. We explored all combinations of predictor fixed variables. These models were ranked by using the Akaike weights (wi), which provide a measure of the probability of each model being the most . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. . https://doi.org /10.1101 /10. /2020 suitable among all of the candidate models. Since there is no single model that has a high Akaike weight (wi > 0.95), we averaged all models in a confidence set at 95% (Swi ³ 0.95) 23 .We reported the conditional (R 2 GLMM(c)) and marginal (R 2 GLMM(m)) coefficient of determination for each model included in the set of candidate best models included in the model averaging.These values represent the variance explained by the fixed predictors and both the fixed predictors and the random variable, respectively 37 . In the case of the relationship between the number of COVID-19 tests and the temperature of each country, the model with the lowest AIC was a simple linear relationship without the influence of a spatial correlation structure or the inclusion of a country-level random effect. All statistical analyses were performed using R 3.6.2 38 . We used the package 'nlme' 39 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. Because temperature and UV-index are highly correlated (see methods), these two variables were analysed separately in two distinct models. The influence of humidity is taken from the UV-based model. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.20.20072934 doi: medRxiv preprint Supporting Information Table S1 . Fixed variable selection for explaining the mortality rate during the COVID-19 outbreak. The best models, according to the weighted AIC criterion, for the analysis including the air temperature and the analysis including the UV-index, are reported. These models are considered in the model averaging (see Table 1 ). For the model averaging, we considered all models with a cumulative weighted AIC of 0.95 (å AIC ³ 0.95).

Results

We examined the possible effects of three climatic variables on the worldwide COVID-19 outbreak: air temperature, UV-index and relative humidity. All these variables are averaged over 30 days, which are the 15 days before and the 15 days after the first registered death in each territory or country. We used a linear mixed model (LMM) with the log transformed mortality rate per region as the response variable. The model considers the country-level as a random intercept and implements an exponential geographical correlation structure (see Methods). We included the climatic variables together with other variables that may explain the extent of the epidemic outbreak, namely (i) the proportion of the population older than 64 years old; (ii) the number of beds in hospitals (per 10K inhabitants), and (iii) the timing and strength of the governmental travel measures to control the spread of the disease. As air temperature is highly correlated with UV-index (see Methods), we tested a temperature-based model (excluding UV-index) and a UV-based model (excluding temperature). We ranked . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.

COVID-19 dataset.

We collected the number of deaths per day due to the COVID-19 in each country affected by SARS-CoV-2 from the dataset hosted by the Centre for Systems Science and Engineering at Johns Hopkins University 3 . This dataset is maintained daily and is verified by registers provided by various health state authorities as well as the World Health Organisation (WHO). The dataset provides information at the country level but also about sub-regions of China, The United States, Canada, and Australia. French and British overseas territories are also included separately in this dataset. Due to the uncertainly regarding the initial stage of the spread of this disease 4 , we decided to exclude the dataset for mainland China. We considered the date of first registered death in each country as well as the cumulative number of deaths during the first 15 days of deaths registration in each country or territory. We used the cumulative mortality at day 15 in order to include the maximum available information and to compare data extracted from similar epidemic phases across . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.

Model

Fixed . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.20.20072934 doi: medRxiv preprint

