| INTRODUCTION

The pandemic due to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has become one of the main global economic and health priorities. Viral RNA detection in respiratory samples using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is the current reference method for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID- 19) diagnosis. However, they are not useful as point of care (POC) tests due to an excessive turnaround time for results. 1, 2 Antigen rapid diagnostic tests (Ag-RDTs) have been developed as alternative tests to PCR for COVID-19 symptomatic patients, as they could be employed as POC tests, presented a lower cost than PCR assays and could improve the turnaround time for results. Moreover, some authors have shown that these advantages could overcome the sensitivity limitation, especially where PCR is unavailable or where prolonged turnaround times preclude clinical utility. [3] [4] [5] Our objective was to evaluate the diagnostic performance of two of these commercialized Ag-RTDs.

| Population and study period

The study was performed between 1 and 30 December 2020. We included 356 nasopharyngeal samples, which were submitted in 3 ml of universal transport medium (UTM). Each sample corresponded to one single patient and we included 186 PCR negative samples and another 170 PCR positive samples. Table S1 ).

| Diagnostic techniques

Regarding Ag-RDTs, we evaluated two Ag-RDTs that detected SARS-CoV-2 nucleoprotein antigens: Panbio COVID-19 Ag Rapid Test Device (Abbot Rapid Diagnostics GmbH, Jena) and SD-Biosensor STANDARD F COVID-19 Ag FIA (SD Biosensor, Inc.). Lecture of the results was optical for Panbio and by immunofluorescence using a STANDARD F2400 analyzer (SD Biosensor, Inc.) for SD-Biosensor Ag-RDT.All equipments were used according to the manufacturer's instructions for both the handling and the interpretation of the results.

| Clinical data

Clinical variables of the study population (time from the onset of symptoms) were obtained from the medical records. We assessed SARS-CoV-2 viral load using the Cycle threshold (C t ) value corresponding to N gene for all PCR positive samples. 6 

| Statistical analysis

Categorical variables were expressed as proportions and continuous variables as median and interquartile range (IQR) and. Sensitivity and specificity with 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) were calculated using RT-PCR as gold standard. Sensitivity was evaluated globally and also according to the C t value for N gene 7 using different cutoffs 

| RESULTS

Diagnostic performance results according C t values are summarized in Table 1 and Figure S1 . Specificity was 100% for Panbio and 97.3%for SD-Biosensor, due to five PCR negative samples that were positive for this assay. Overall sensitivity was 60.0% for Panbio and 66.5%for SD-Biosensor and this difference was statistically significant (p = 0.003). Sensitivity was higher for samples with high viral loads, reaching 100.0% for samples with C t ≤ 20 for both tests. For samples with C t = 20-25, sensitivity was 93.0% for Panbio and 95.3% for SD-Biosensor (p = 1.000). Sensitivity significantly decreased for low viral load samples: for C t values between 25 and 30, sensitivity was 41.3%for Panbio and 52.2% for SD-Biosensor (p = 0.125), and for C t values over 30, sensitivity was 5.0% for Panbio and 17.5% for SD-Biosensor (p = 0.063). There were no significant differences on sensitivity results between Ag-RDTs according C t values (Table 1) Abbreviations: Ag-RDT, antigen rapid diagnostic test; C t , cycle threshold; N/A, not applicable; 95% CI, 95% confidence interval; p-value, level of significance.T A B L E 2 Diagnostic performance of the evaluated Ag-RDTs according to time form the onset of symptoms 

