

. Study population flow chart of counties included in the analysis. Historically, more rural areas saw a lower burden of infectious disease because smaller populations meant diseases were less likely to be circulating, 9 suggesting that counties with smaller populations or larger land areas may be less impacted if those who are unwell come into contact with fewer people allowing the disease to burn out before cases and CFR climb. Demographics demo_p60more Percentage of population aged 60 years or older COVID-19 has a higher fatality rate for older populations, while sparing younger ages from more severe forms of the disease. 10 Demographics demo_p65morePercentage of population aged 65 years or older COVID-19 has a higher fatality rate for older populations, while sparing younger ages from more severe forms of the disease. 10 

Demographics demo_p45_64

Percentage of population aged 45 to 64COVID-19 has a higher fatality rate for older populations, while sparing younger ages from more severe forms of the disease. 10 Demographics demo_popdensity Population density Population density may make social distancing more challenging and may also result in a higher effective contact rate. 11 Demographics demo_population Total population of each county (same as demo_bridgedrace_total)Historically, more rural areas saw a lower burden of infectious disease because smaller populations meant diseases were less likely to be circulating, 9 suggesting that counties with smaller populations or larger land areas may be less impacted if those who are unwell come into contact with fewer people allowing the disease to burn out before cases and CFR climb Healthcare access & capacity hc_hospitalsNumber of Hospitals Counties with greater healthcare resources available will presumably be able to manage a higher case-load before becoming overwhelmed. 12 This variable is used to construct the Social Vulnerability Index (SVI). This variable represents increased challenges to social distancing. For instance, an individual falling ill in a crowded apartment will have more difficulty in selfisolating than someone living in a spacious home. Individuals living in apartment complexes will have more difficulty in maintaining a 6-foot distance when outside than individuals with access to backyards. 22 County-level predictors of COVID-19 laCFR in the United States, R 2 = 0.8620. 

