INTRODUCTION

Since the global outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), there have been concerns about its high prevalence among health-care workers and their household members. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] The disease is thought to be caused by the Coronavirus and transmission via the airborne route. [7] [8] [9] The disease can progress rapidly and often results in acute respiratory distress syndrome, with many cases fatal. 10 Singapore reported its first three cases of SARS on 13 March 2003. 11 As the number of infected patients increased, more drastic measures were instituted. [12] [13] [14] These included closure of schools, travel advisories to SARS-affected areas, Home Quarantine Orders to persons exposed to SARS patients or returning from SARS-affected areas and increased education on good social behaviour (e.g. to avoid spitting in public). Violations of these laws were punishable by fines and/or jail terms.By 31 May 2003, SARS had infected 206 people in Singapore, with slightly more than half of those infected being health-care workers or hospital inpatients. 15 In order to control the transmission of SARS from patient to health worker, the Ministry of Health enforced strict hospital infection control protocols to help break the chain of transmission. 16 These measures included compulsory SARS screening for all patients, relatives and visitors. This involved temperature checks both at the main entrances and at entrances to all departments, compulsory filling in of a SARS exposure risk questionnaire, compulsory use of personnel protective equipment (PPE) such as gloves, gown, goggles and N-95 mask by health-care workers, and wearing of mask and gown by patients (Fig. 1 ). The hospital also implemented a 'no visitor' rule (with a limit of one visitor if there were compassionate grounds), restricted physical access into hospitals, and implementation of a 1 week on, 1 week off team approach for all staff, that is, radiotherapy centre staff were divided into two groups with each alternating group working every other week. At the National University Hospital (NUH) Radiotherapy Centre, these measures were strictly enforced.There is increasing importance placed by the patient on the quality of the doctor-patient interaction. [17] [18] [19] Levels of satisfaction are thought to influence compliance, communication, continuity of care, promptness to seek help, patient's level of understanding and retention of information, all of which are essential in the delivery of high-quality clinical care. [20] [21] [22] We wished to evaluate patient satisfaction during the SARS outbreak, and we postulated that satisfaction with doctor-patient interaction might be adversely affected by perception of SARS preventive measures.Thus, our primary aim was to measure the level of patient satisfaction with their doctor-patient interaction during the SARS outbreak using a questionnaire previously validated for radiotherapy outpatient consultation. 23 Our secondary aim was to determine what factors, including patient perception of SARS precautions, age, tumour type and stage, might affect satisfaction with doctor-patient interaction. It was believed the information obtained would be useful for any radiotherapy centre preparing contingency planning for infectious disease outbreaks -a time when patient satisfaction might be considered of secondary importance.

METHODS AND MATERIALS

The questionnaire instrument consisted of two parts. The first part incorporated a previously validated 29-question patient satisfaction questionnaire (questions 1-29, Table 1 ) specific for radiotherapy centre outpatient visits. 23 This questionnaire was designed to evaluate four aspects (or 'domains') of doctorpatient interaction: information exchange, interpersonal skills, empathy and quality of time. We also added one additional question assessing 'overall' satisfaction (question 30).For the second part of the questionnaire (Table 2) Table 2 ). Questions were designed with the aid of staff and patients.For every question, patients were asked to indicate their agreement (strongly disagree, disagree, agree, strongly agree).Responses were scored out of 4, with 1 correlating to least satisfied, and 4 to most satisfied. Any average score of > 2. Patients were asked to anonymously fill in the questionnaire after the consultation. Patients were asked to deposit completed questionnaires into a closed survey box placed in the separate patient waiting area.Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS version 11.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA), except for confidence levels, 24 which were calculated with a calculator spreadsheet. 25 Uni and multivariate analyses evaluated the following patient characteristics: age, sex, race, spoken language (English vs Chinese), paying class, tumour type, cancer stage, type of visit, Patient characteristics are displayed in Table 3 . 3.02 †Mean of transformed scores, so that for each question (whether positively or negatively framed) a high score is equivalent to higher satisfaction.

SARS questions

Overall, 97% of patients had heard about SARS ( 

Doctor-patient satisfaction

Overall, 92% of patients were satisfied with their doctor-patient 

In fact, it boosts my confidence that RTC [the Radiotherapy

Centre] is taking SARS precautions seriously'.Anecdotally, one patient became extremely distressed and aggressive when told relatives were not allowed, and required restraining. Another patient openly wept throughout the consultation because of the no visitor rule. As a result of the anonymous nature of the questionnaire, it is uncertain how (or whether) these patients responded.

DISCUSSION

Previous studies have shown that patients' compliance to treatment and hence the success of their treatment depends on their satisfaction with their doctor-patient interaction. 18, 19, 20, 26, 27 In multiethnic Singapore, cultural and subcultural influence is strong, thus achieving patient satisfaction is challenging. This is made more difficult with inherent problems of As we expected, patients who were less satisfied with the SARS prevention measures were also less satisfied with doctorpatient interaction. We postulated that patients might feel alienated by doctors wearing goggles, gown and masks (Fig. 1) , feel less secure without relatives present, be frustrated by longer waiting times, and be dissatisfied that every second week they would not see their treating consultant because of the week-on,week-off roster. We believed that patients who were more satisfied with such measures would be more tolerant to potential deterioration of doctor-patient interaction, and hence would be more satisfied with questionnaire items. Based on the uni and multivariate analyses, we appear to be correct in our assumption. Dissatisfaction with SARS measures was associated with dissatisfaction in all doctor-patient interaction domains.The appearance of donning one's PPE (goggles, mask, gloves and gown - Fig. 1) 

