Introduction

Since the outbreak of COVID 19 , there has been extensive attempt from every sphere to come up with a suitable medicine for treatment purpose. However, till date there has been no single approved medicine for COVID 19 treatment [1] though several of them are in clinical trial and are showing promising result. Remdesivir is presently the frontrunners among the drug of choice for the treatment of COVID-19 as evidenced from clinical trials. However, there is no consolidated critical clinical summery on the activity and performance of Remdesivir in clinical settings. This article approaches a critical appreciation on the drug based on clinical evidences which is essential in present context. of suspect and laboratory confirmed COVID 19 case in adult and children hospitalized with severe disease [7] . The EPA allows Remdesivir to be distributed and administered intravenously by health care providers, as appropriate for the treatment of COVID-19. Based on the evaluation of EUA and clinical evidence available, considering the non-availability of any drug or treatment options for COVID-19, Remdesivir is assumed to be effective. The fact sheet provides detailed guidelines in this regard. EUA is provided to Gilead Sciences Inc. that simultaneously carries out clinical trials. 

Probable mechanism against COVID19

Remdesivir is a prodrug of an adenosine triphosphate (ATP) analog and its triphosphate form (RDV-TP) is known to inhibit the synthesis of viral RNA by delayed chain termination method [5] . A probable molecular mechanism is deciphered that the RDT-TP binds with RNA dependent RNA Polymerase [6] and forms complex with the viral RNA and ATP to inhibit RNA synthesis [9] . ▶Fig 2 summarizes the plausible mechanism of Remdesivir.

Dosage and use

The USFDA through EUA suggests the use of Remdesivir, administered through intravenous (IV) infusion to treat COVID 19. Though the optimal dose and duration of treatment remains unknown, their suggestion is depicted in ▶table 1 [10] .

Other considerations and possible side effect

It is advisable to use Remdesivir during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk for the mother and the fetus. Since the pharmacokinetic analysis of Remdesivir is unavailable for patient with renal as well as hepatic imparement, its use is subject to potential risk and benefit consideration i. e. when the potential benefit outweighs the potential risk. Hepatic laboratory testing is compulsory during treatment [10] .Several infusions related reactions and symptoms including hypotension, nausea, vomiting, diaphoresis etc. are also reported in some case, that might require discontinuing the drug if clinically significant reaction takes place. Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) ▶Fig. 1 Chemical Structure of Remdesivir.▶Fig. 2 Plausible mechanism of action of Remdesivir against COVID19. elevation is also seen [10] . The most common adverse events were increased hepatic enzymes, diarrhea, rash, renal impairment, and hypotension. In general, adverse events were more common in patients receiving invasive ventilation [11] .The empirical non-clinical data of side-effect of Remdesivir is limited to mostly in-vitro observations. However, in-vivo pharmacological studies showed that Remdesivir may transiently increase respiratory rate while no significant effect on respiration or EKG have been recorded. Remdesivir is also negative in genotoxicity studies. No renal or hepatic abnormalities were attributed to Remdesivir usage [12] . No effect on CNS and cardiovascular function have been reported [13] . Considering these facts, Remdesivir is still not beyond question [14] and remains incompletely defined in human population [15] .

Clinical research output

The process of systemic review was followed (▶ Figure 3) Feb 2020, that has peaked up since the declaration of pandemic by WHO on 12 th March 2020. Analyzing the clinical trials from ▶table 2 it is evident that there is attempt to use Remdesivir alone or in combination with other drugs for the treatment of COVID 19. The non-availability of any suitable drug for the therapeutic purpose of COVID 19 as well as lack of information regarding safety issue of Remdesivir has promted its use only in hospital set-up and that too for critically ill patents. Data of adverse drug effect and long term use are expected only by the end of this year through several studies. Only a mere handful of publications are reported from the results of clinical trials (17, 18) while most of them are yet to be completed and still inconclusive. As a result, Remdesivir still remains as investigational drug, distant from USFDA approval.

Scientific Publications

There has been 660 Scientific publications found on the keyword 'Remdesivir; in pubmed.gov. out of which 636 are from the current year. However, a majority of them are review articles and meta-analysis while only 7 reflect results of clinical trials. The following ▶table 3 summarizes the clinical results reflected in research publication.

Conclusion

Remdesivir is presently a 'molecule of hope' to the world to stop the menace of COVID19. However, it has to cross stringent safety regulations and clinical trial to be out of question. It is to be remembered that Remdesivir is still not a USFDA approved drug and its efficacy against COVID 19 are initial result that requires subsequent validation and safety/ risk analysis studies for a longer duration to act as a full proof weapon against COVID 19. Careful monitoring of patient condition and parameters are warranted during Remdesivir administration. Scientific research should also look beyond this molecule to come up with better alternatives, which remains a challenge considering present situation. In this trial ethical and moral obligation of patients are evaluated in terms of effective treatment. The trial is a reproduction of Remdesivir and other drug usage to identify whether the drugs offer real time benefit to patients.[24]

