

Lung ultrasound has been suggested as a useful tool to detect lung involvement during COVID-19, particularly desirable for pregnant women. [1] [2] [3] We developed a specific single day training program to provide gynecologists/obstetricians, already skilled in ultrasound examination, the theoretical background for the recognition of the main lung ultrasound patterns. Feasibility of the program and its effectiveness by comparing the number of correct answers in pre and post-training results were evaluated. The training program was developed at Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy and at University of Trento. The program design was presented to the COVID-19 Research Ethical Committee who evaluated and approved the project (Prot. 1370/20, ID: 3067).A total of 11 gynecologists and obstetricians, skilled in obstetrics and/or gynecological ultrasound with no experience in lung ultrasound were enrolled and 3 of them have been involved for one week in meetings with pneumologists to prepare the "how-to" paper. 4 The teachers were two pneumologists The number of correct answers (pre-and post-training) has been recorded for each participant (Suppl Table 1 ). The median number of correct answers among all trainees was 6 (range 2-10) at the pre-test and 9 (range 6-10) at the post-test. The group experienced an increase of the median number of correct answers of 2 (median of the difference between post-and pre-tests).When classifying, at post-test analysis, the six patterns in two groups (pattern 1=normal and patterns 2-6=abnormal), 8/10 participants correctly discriminated normal from pathological patterns in all cases, 2/10 in 90% of cases, 1/10 in 80% of cases.In conclusion, our preliminary experience showed that a fast teaching program was sufficient to provide appropriate theoretical skills to recognize specific lung ultrasound patterns. We believe that our course represents one possible model of implementing lung ultrasound education and it might be a useful launch pad for gynecologists/obstetricians, involved in the management of COVID-19 pregnant patients.This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

