

1. The paper investigates the sex difference in the prevalence of coronavirus disease confirmed cases during the 2020 pandemic of COVID-19 using published literature from 2019 to 2020. A systematic review of the published literature (PubMed, Cochrane library, and Google Scholar) and a random effect metaanalysis model were used to pool the overall prevalence of COVID-19 by gender. Data on 57 studies with 221195 participants were used for analysis. The authors assessed the heterogeneity of effect size using the Q statistic and the I2 statistics. Subgroup and sensitivity analysis was done including the assessment of publication bias.2. The context is relevant; the topic is extremely important as the outbreak of the pandemic of COVID-19 constitute a health risk with economic impact on public health. Nevertheless, the study's findings need to be confronted with a rigorous analysis of the data.

I have the following queries and suggestions:

Major comments 4. This is an important research topic and one that has potential to fill important knowledge gaps and contributes to the ongoing debate on the worldwide prevalence of the pandemic. Justification for inclusion of the study has been clearly stated and the suggested statistical analysis looks rigorous. 5 . While the statistical methods are outlined and justified clearly, just how the study was designed could be explained further. It is noticeable; however, that majority of studies are from China alone in the pooled studies. Some thought has been given to conduct subgroup and sensitivity analysis, eg sub-group by the study country and sample size. However, overall the pooled estimate of the random effects model is heavily influenced by China. On the 57 studies, only four studies are not from China (coming from Korea, Italy and Japan) with small sample size and the results run the risk of having only limited impact on policy and outcomes globally. The projected findings may be largely aimed at China. 7 . The English language restriction of the search criteria is also a major limitation of the study findings. Little effort was made by authors to consult other data sources and perhaps complement the published data with countries specific data worldwide. For instance, country specific data published by international organisations such WHO or ministry of health of specific countries or independent organisations (https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/coronavirus-age-sexdemographics/) could have been used to refine the estimates of the published data and to include more countries in the analysis.Minor comments 8. In the conclusion the authors argued that the male-female difference can be explained by hormonal and chromosomal variation between males and females and high prevalence of smoking and alcohol consumption among men. This conclusion is not supported by data and it is a mere speculation. The selected studies have this information; a meta-regression analysis should be conducted to ascertain the effects of these factors on the prevalence. 9 . They are also some inaccuracies in the text. For instance: Page 4 (Line 58): the sentence reads "So far, 2019-nCoV has affected more than 210 countries with 2, 733,591 confirmed cases….". There are 195 countries in the world today. This total comprises 193 countries that are member states of the United Nations and 2 countries that are non-member observer states: The Holy See and the State of Palestine. Therefore, the number of 210 countries cited by the authors is not correct. See the reference here https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/coronavirus-age-sexdemographics/

VERSION 1 -AUTHOR RESPONSE

To Reviewer: 1 Dear Symons Rolf (Reviewer) we would like to forward our deep-seated gratitude for your interesting and valuable comments and helping us throughout the process. We all really appreciate your potential and optimism while you give such constructive and in-depth comments. Since we have agreed with all of your points raised we believe we have amended the manuscript as per your comments. We would like to thank you again since you are contributing for our better paper by giving such comments which is important to improve the quality of this paper. Below we have written the point to point response to issues you raised. Reviewer Comment: 1) General: This is an interesting effort, but I believe the conclusion the authors make is wrong. The prevalence of COVID-19 in symptomatic subjects who present to the ER/get tested is higher in males. Several studies have suggested a worse outcome for men with COVID-19 and more extensive involvement on chest CT has been shown in males (e.g., Jin JM, et al. Gender differences in patients with COVID-19: Focus on severity and mortality. Frontiers in Public Health. 2020 Apr 29;8:152 and Dangis A, et al. Impact of gender on extent of lung injury in COVID-19. Clinical Radiology. 2020 Apr 23). The data the authors have does allow them to conclude COVID-19 is more prevalent in symptomatic patients, but as 90% of COVID-19 subjects remains largely asymptomatic they cannot claim the prevalence of COVID-19 is higher in males in general. Author response: Thank you very much dear for the resource you supplied and raised an interesting point regarding our conclusion. The prevalence of COVID-19 in symptomatic subjects who present to the ER/get tested is higher in males. The prevalence of COVID -19 among tested and confirmed patients is also higher in males. This finding was also reported by other studies, for instance a study in Ontario, Canada showed that men were more likely to test positive, and had higher rates of hospitalization, ICU admission, and death (1, 2) . This might be due to most tested patients are symptomatic and males are more likely to be symptomatic. In addition roles and behaviors which increase the risk of acquiring COVID-19 are more prevalent in male. Male are more involved in different risky behaviors like alcohol consumption (3) (4) (5) , key activities in burial rites; as employees in basic sectors and occupations that continue being active and require them to work outside the home and interact with other people during the containment phase (e.g., food or pharmacy manufacturing and sales, agriculture or food production and distribution, transportation and logistics, and security. B/C of such behaviors males mostly don't stay at home, sit together, remove their mask while they drink and smoke. These increased levels of exposure makes males at high risk of acquiring COVID-19 disease; that is why it is more prevalent in male. Other literatures like Global Health 5050 data gathering, the prevalence of COVID-19 confirmed cases and the death rate due to COVID-19 is high among males in different countries (6) (7) (8) .We have included such information in discussion part. We have amended the conclusion as per your comment: Page 2 line 28 Reviewer Comment: 2) Background, p3;37: Sever -> Severe Smoking and drinking alcohol reduce your overall health and therefore make you more susceptible to symptomatic COVID-19 infection. Author response: Amended as per your comment Page 10 line 2020-209 Reviewer Comment: To conclude, the effort is good, but the conclusions are wrong. Complete overhaul and resubmission could be considered. Author response: thank you very much again since we have extensively amended the paper to make it better than its previous submission because of you.TO Reviewer: 2 Dear Weizhi Liu (Reviewer) we would like to forward our deep-seated gratitude for your interesting and valuable comments and helping us throughout the process. We all really appreciate your potential and optimism while you give such constructive and in-depth comments. Since we have agreed with all of your points raised we believe we have amended the manuscript as per your comments. We would like to thank you again since you are contributing for our better paper by giving such comments which is important to improve the quality of this paper. Below we have written the point to point response to issues you raised. Reviewer Comment: In all, the manuscript is compact and clear. It draws an important issue considering the sex difference in COVID-19 pandemic, which is critical reference for future polices and interventions. However, there were several limitations affecting the strength of the results. There are mainly two concerns from my view: lack of Chinese database (as mentioned in Limitations, I suggest collaborating with Chinese scholars) and inadequate analysis of source of heterogeneity (since most of studies was in China, subgroup by country was not enough. Authors could consider province, study quality, and sample size, et al.). Other comments are as follows: Author response: We have consulted chines e scholar to the database and we used the data we get to compare our result in discussion part. As a result we extensively enriched the discussion part. Thank you very much after your direction we have made subgroup analysis by province, study quality, and sample size and we found: The pooled prevalence of COVID- 19 Supplementary Fig 2) . Regarding quality score the pooled prevalence of COVID-19 among male in studies which scored greater than or equal to seven was 53.66(95% CI:49.23-58.09) ;I2 =99.5, P= 0.00, and 56.79(95% CI:52.79-60.990) ;I2 =94.7, P= 0.00 among studies scored less than seven from JBI quality appraisal checklist( Table 2 and Supplementary Fig 3) . Regarding sample size the pooled prevalence of COVID-19 among male in studies which have sample size greater than or equal to 384 was 53.86(95% CI:47.09-60.63) ;I2 =99.9, P= 0.00, and 54.96(95% CI:52.35-57.57) ;I2 =64.5, P= 0.00 among studies scored less than seven from JBI quality appraisal checklist (Table 2 and Supplementary figure 4). We have presented this findings in the manuscript: Page 7, Line 126-140, Table 2 Reviewer Comment: 1. In full-text review, has the authors checked duplicate samples? If so, I suggest mentioned that in the paper. Author response: The citation manager (Endnote version 4.2) automatically identifies duplicates among imported references, which we had deleted. For those different citation for the same paper we screened and de-duplicated the citations by hand, which were recorded on a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet after assessing if they have the same author, title, publication date, volume, issue, sample size, etc we removed the duplicated one. We have explained these in the manuscript as per your comment. Result: Page 6, Line 113-116 Reviewer Comment: 2. In results, authors used term "severe illness". Does that mean "confirmed cases"? I thought it was easy to be mixed with "critical ill case". Author response: yes it was editorial mistake, amended as per your comment: Page 7: Line 124. Reviewer Comment: 3. The description of how many individuals included in analysis and the definition of a COVID-19 confirmed case are needed. Author response: • 57 studies with a total of 2,21195 patients were included in the analysis: Page 6; Line 113 • We have also included the case definitions of COVID-19 Confirmed case: Detection of SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid in a clinical specimen ; Possible case: Any person with at least one of the following symptoms : cough, fever, shortness of breath, sudden onset of anosmia, ageusia or dysgeusia; Probable case: Any person with at least one of the following symptoms : cough, fever, shortness of breath, sudden onset of anosmia, ageusia or dysgeusia, with close contact with a confirmed COVID-19 case in the 14 days prior to onset of symptom or having been a resident or a staff member, in the 14 days prior to onset of symptoms, in a residential institution for vulnerable people where ongoing COVID-19 transmission has been confirmed :Page 5, Line 96-101. Reviewer Comment: 5. In presentation of publication bias, I suggest author summarized the results from software rather than directly using the screen-capture. Author response: we have summarized the publication bias result in text and removed the picture from the software and amended as per your comment: Page 8 Line 147-148. Reviewer Comment: 6. In discussion, the writing was too simple. I suggest more explanation on: How was the results supported by other findings (e.g. comparisons with the results from other studies)? How did sex chromosomes influence the process of getting infectious disease? What were possible source of bias (e.g. comment based on study quality)? Author response: we have re-write the discussion considering your and other reviewers comment. We have tried to compare with other studies result finding. To be frank we extensively enriched the discussion part. We have done subgroup analysis using province, sample size and JBI quality score of included studies and the result is presented in the manuscript. Supplementary Fig 2) . Regarding quality score the pooled prevalence of COVID-19 among male in studies which scored greater than or equal to seven was 53.66(95% CI:49.23-58.09) ;I2 =99.5, P= 0.00, and 56.79(95% CI:52.79-60.990) ;I2 =94.7, P= 0.00 among studies scored less than seven from JBI quality appraisal checklist( Table 2 and Supplementary Fig 3) . Regarding sample size the pooled prevalence of COVID-19 among male in studies which have sample size greater than or equal to 384 was 53.86(95% CI:47.09-60.63) ;I2 =99.9, P= 0.00, and 54.96(95% CI:52.35-57.57) ;I2 =64.5, P= 0.00 among studies scored less than seven from JBI quality appraisal checklist (Table 2 and Supplementary figure 4) . We have presented this findings in the manuscript: Page 7, Line 126-140, Table 2 , Supplementary figure 1,2,3 and 4 ) Reviewer Comment 7: In conclusion, 'everyone should take actions, such as hand washing with sanitizer, social distancing, avoid crowding (2m apart if coming together is must)'seems irrelevant to the findings of the current study. Author response: removed as per your comment Reviewer Comment 8: the content of JBI should be introduced in Supplementary material. Author response: We have included the JBI quality appraisal checklist below the quality score in Supplementary Table 2 it can also be found at http://joannabriggs.org/research/critical-appraisaltools.html To Reviewer: 3 Dear Ngianga-Bakwin Kandala (Reviewer) we would like to forward our deep-seated gratitude for your interesting and valuable comments and helping us throughout the process. We all really appreciate your potential and optimism while you give such constructive and in-depth comments. Since we have agreed with all of your points raised we believe we have amended the manuscript as per your comments. We would like to thank you again since you are contributing for our better paper by giving such comments which is important to improve the quality of this paper. Below we have written the point to point response to issues you raised. General comments: The paper investigates the sex difference in the prevalence of coronavirus disease (COVID- 19) confirmed cases during the 2020 pandemic of COVID-19 using published literature from 2019 to 2020. A systematic review of the published literature (PubMed, Cochrane library, and Google Scholar) and a random effect meta-analysis model were used to pool the overall prevalence of COVID-19 by gender. Data on 57 studies with 221195 participants were used for analysis. The authors assessed the heterogeneity of effect size using the Q statistic and the I2 statistics. Subgroup and sensitivity analysis was done including the assessment of publication bias. The context is relevant; the topic is extremely important as the outbreak of the pandemic of COVID-19 constitute a health risk with economic impact on public health. Nevertheless, the study's findings need to be confronted with a rigorous analysis of the data. 3. I have the following queries and suggestions: Major comments Reviewer Comment : This is an important research topic and one that has potential to fill important knowledge gaps and contributes to the ongoing debate on the worldwide prevalence of the pandemic. Justification for inclusion of the study has been clearly stated and the suggested statistical analysis looks rigorous. While the statistical methods are outlined and justified clearly, just how the study was designed could be explained further. It is noticeable; however, that majority of studies are from China alone in the pooled studies. Some thought has been given to conduct subgroup and sensitivity analysis, eg subgroup by the study country and sample size. However, overall the pooled estimate of the random effects model is heavily influenced by China. On the 57 studies, only four studies are not from China (coming from Korea, Italy and Japan) with small sample size and the results run the risk of having only limited impact on policy and outcomes globally. The projected findings may be largely aimed at China.Authors' response: yes you are correct due to lack of published papers from other countries at the beginning most of the published articles were from china. In addition to assess the impact of sample size, study quality and province we further conducted subgroup analysis by province, sample size and study quality as we also directed by other revewers in addition to your concern. Thank you very much after your direction we have made subgroup analysis by province, study quality, and sample size and we found: (Table 2 and Supplementary Fig 2) . Regarding quality score the pooled prevalence of COVID-19 among male in studies which scored greater than or equal to seven was 53.66(95% CI:49.23-58.09) ;I2 =99.5, P= 0.00, and 56.79(95% CI:52.79-60.990) ;I2 =94.7, P= 0.00 among studies scored less than seven from JBI quality appraisal checklist (Table 2 and Supplementary Fig 3) . Regarding sample size the pooled prevalence of COVID-19 among male in studies which have sample size greater than or equal to 384 was 53.86(95% CI:47.09-60.63) ;I2 =99.9, P= 0.00, and 54.96(95% CI:52.35-57.57) ;I2 =64.5, P= 0.00 among studies scored less than seven from JBI quality appraisal checklist (Table 2 and Supplementary figure 4) . We have presented this findings in the manuscript: Page 7, Line 126-140, Table 2 , Supplementary  figure 1,2,3 and 4 ) We have tried to discuss our result with other countries finding which were not included in to the analysis because of not fulfilling the inclusion criteria or due to quality appraisal process. We have included this in limitation of the study as the pooled estimate may be influenced by china. Reviewer Comment: The English language restriction of the search criteria is also a major limitation of the study findings. Little effort was made by authors to consult other data sources and perhaps complement the published data with countries specific data worldwide. For instance, country specific data published by international organizations such WHO or ministry of health of specific countries or independent organizations (https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/coronavirus-age-sexdemographics/) could have been used to refine the estimates of the published data and to include more countries in the analysis. Authors' response: using only papers published in English were also our drawback that we included in limitation of the study. However, as you directed as we have used the country specific data published by international organizations such WHO or ministry of health of specific countries or independent organizations to compare and discus our result. However those finding doesn't fulfill the quality appraisal checklist mainly because they lack a detail methodology which the appraisal checklist requires. As a result we didn't include such findings in the pooled result rather we synthesize and discus this results considering your comment. Reviewer Comment 8: In the conclusion the authors argued that the male-female difference can be explained by hormonal and chromosomal variation between males and females and high prevalence of smoking and alcohol consumption among men. This conclusion is not supported by data and it is a mere speculation. The selected studies have this information; a meta-regression analysis should be conducted to ascertain the effects of these factors on the prevalence. Authors' response: We have enriched the discussion by supporting our justification with data/previous literatures in discussion. This finding was also reported by other studies (9, 10) . A study in Ontario, Canada showed that men were more likely to test positive (1, 2) . In Pakistan 72% of COVID-19 cases were male (11) . According to Global Health 5050 data gathering, the number of COVID-19 confirmed cases and the death rate due to COVID-19 is high among males in different countries (6) (7) (8) . This might be due to behavioral factors and roles which increase the risk of acquiring COVID-19 tend to occur more among men. Male are more involved in different risky behaviors like alcohol consumption (3) (4) (5) , key activities in burial rites; as employees in basic sectors and occupations that continue being active and require them to work outside the home and interact with other people during the containment phase (e.g., food or pharmacy manufacturing and sales, agriculture or food production and distribution, transportation, and security). Because of such behaviors males mostly don't stay at home, sit together, and remove their mask while they drink and smoke. These increased levels of exposure makes males at high risk of acquiring COVID-19 disease. In China 50% of men in smoke, but because it is not considered acceptable for women to smoke, only 2% of them do so.Smoking is associated with adverse outcomes of COVID-19: for instance, the combined results of five studies showed that smokers were 1.4 times more likely than non-smokers to have severe symptoms of COVID-19 (12) . Besides, smoking is related to higher expression of ACE2 (the receptor for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 [SARS-CoV-2]), which might be the reason for the higher prevalence of COVID-19 in this subgroup of patients than in women (13) . Men tended to develop more symptomatic and serious cases than women, according to the clinical classification of severity. Similar occasions occurred during previous coronavirus epidemics: men had worse outcomes of illness from severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), (14) and a higher risk of dying from Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) (15) . Biological sex variation is said to be one of the reason for the sex discrepancy of COVID-19 cases, severity and mortality (16) . Women are in general able to mount a more vigorous immune response to infections and vaccinations (17) . Some previous studies on coronaviruses in mice have suggested that the hormone estrogen may have a protective role. Estrogens suppress the escalation phase of the immune response that leads to increased cytokine release (18) . The authors showed that female mice treated with an estrogen receptor antagonist died at close to the same rate as the male mice (19) . The X chromosome is known to contain the largest number of immune-related genes in the whole genome (15) . With their XX chromosome, women have a double copy of key immune genes compared to the single copy in XY men. This boost extends to both the general reaction to infection (the innate response) and also to the more specific response to microbes including antibody formation (adaptive immunity) (15) . Thus women's immune systems are generally more responsive to infections. This might mean women are able to tackle the novel coronavirus more effectively but this has not yet been proven. Thank you very much you have directed us a very important point regarding meta-regression. We have run meta-regression to asses the effects of factors on the pooled prevalence and we found the following result. Univariate meta-regression analyses revealed that the prevalence of smoking was found to be high in males .This contributed for high prevalence of COVID-19 among males (P=0.002). Comorbidities like hypertension (0.042), diabetic mellitus (0.012, chronic respiratory disease (0.021), and cardio vascular disease (0.001) were also found to be higher in males and these significantly increases the prevalence of COVID-19. Besides, higher proportion of sever/critical illness (0.003) and death (0.001) were also observed among males (Table 3) . Page 8 Line 150-154 Reviewer Comment 9: They are also some inaccuracies in the text. For instance: Page 4 (Line 58): the sentence reads "So far, 2019-nCoV has affected more than 210 countries with 2, 733,591 confirmed cases....". There are 195 countries in the world today. This total comprises 193 countries that are member states of the United Nations and 2 countries that are non-member observer states: The Holy See and the State of Palestine. Therefore, the number of 210 countries cited by the authors is not correct. See the reference here https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/coronavirus-age-sex-demographics/ Author Response: we have amended the mistake sorry for that it was due to using inappropriate literature. Regarding English language we have consulted a native English speaking collogues and they have edited the paper. We (all authors) have also edited it through repetitive checking and online grammar editor.

