

The framework presents findings from empirical research on a spectrum of research utilization typologies and relates these findings to organizational processes. Beyer and Trice's framework encompasses four organizational processes: information processing, affective bonding, strategy formulation and control, and action generation. Information processing concerns the cognition of research through deliberate actions of sensing, searching and diffusing evidence. Affective bonding refers to evidence consumers' feelings about research. Evidence consumers' affective reaction, receptivity and commitment towards evidence use shape this organizational process. The organizational process of strategy formulation and control addresses behaviours following the recognition of research evidence by selecting, evaluating and providing feedback on research evidence. Action generation pertains to the adoption, use, and, sometimes, the institutionalization of evidence (7) . In previous analyses, scholars have set their focus on one of these organizational processes.Instrumental evidence use follows a rational, prescriptive and systematic approach (8) . Research is directly used in direct and specific ways (9) . Either, questions identified by an organization lead to the commissioning of research to find a solution (problem-solving/engineering/policy-driven model) (10), or, research initiates organizational actions (classic/purist/knowledge-driven model) (9, 11) . The latter model is inherent to the assumption that stakeholders have a consensus on a goal and that evidence is sought and used actively in policy and decision-making processes (12) . 

Annex 1

How are mathematical models and results from mathematical models of vaccine-preventable diseases used, or not, by global health organizations? Within the category of conceptual evidence use, potential evidence users consider multiple sources of evidence and other contextual factors influence actions (9) . This reflects the complexity of organizational processes arguably more realistically (13). Evidence production and consumption are therefore not bound to a linear, but a dynamic process. Conceptual evidence use can be described with the enlightenment (9) or the interactive model (11) . In the enlightenment model evidence 'creeps' into decisions, shaping them incrementally over a longer period (14). The interactive model in this category of evidence use is defined similarly to the enlightenment model. Though, this model focuses more specifically on the existence of collaborations among stakeholders (12) .Lastly, symbolic evidence use can be further described through the political model or the tactical model (11) . In the political model, evidence is used as a supportive device for a position that has already been taken. Organizations use evidence selectively and strategically. In the tactical model, the content of the evidence is negligible as the fact that research is being conducted in the field is used as an argument. Assumptions, in-depth explanations, critics and examples of each of the explanatory models were further outlined by Case (13). Variations of the six explanatory models are described by Hanney et al (11) . 

