

disappearance events and 88 years of commercial and subsistence harvesting data reveals boom -bust population cycles lasting from 20 to 30 years, in which a rapid population crash occurring over 1 to 5 years is followed by a period of absence of 7 to12 years and then a slow growth phase. Overhunting alone cannot explain the crashes, but as in northern systems dispersal during the growth phase appears to play a key role. This is the first documentation of population cycling in a tropical vertebrate.

Main text

The white-lipped peccary (Tayassu pecari, henceforth "WLP"), is the only tropical forest mammal to form large, permanent, cohesive herds comprising hundreds of individuals. While the WLP's unusual social organization is well-known, another characteristic of this keystone species-the disappearance and eventual reappearance of entire populations over large spatial scales-is only anecdotally documented and remains poorly understood.The WLP has tremendous impact on forest composition and on the livelihoods of forestdependent peoples. In the Amazon, the home range of a typical herd of about 400 animals may extend to 200 km 2 (6) . Considering an adult weight of 30 to 50 kg, such a herd represents 12,000 to 20,000 kg of biomass moving in synchrony, rooting up soils, consuming seeds, seedlings, plant parts and animal matter, dropping excreta, creating wallows, and serving as preferred prey for large cats, all factors that influence biotic communities 7 and the carbon cycle 8 . WLP population dynamics are therefore of interest in studies of forest ecology, as periodicity in their abundance may permit periodic recruitment of plants and shifting predator pressure on other prey species.The WLP is also highly prized as food by indigenous peoples 9 and plays a prominent role in their religious beliefs 10, 11, 12 . WLPs can contribute > 70% of all animal biomass consumed in indigenous Yanomami and Kaxinawa villages 6, 13 . Loss of WLP populations alters religious practices 12 and may induce human emigration 14 .In the 1980s, researchers in the Amazon began to report occasional and local disappearances of WLP populations, attributing them to large-scale movements 2,3 , overhunting 4 , or disease outbreaks 15 . In 1997, Fragoso 5 documented the absence and subsequent reappearance of WLPs over a region the size of Norway, and suggested that epidemics could cause disappearances over very large, regional scales (millions of ha). No data were available to inform whether these events were related to local, novel disease outbreaks, as documented for temperate and tropical Old-World ungulates 16, 17 , or an intrinsic and recurrent consequence of the species' unique social organization, herd size and movements. Because WLPs are notoriously difficult to study in their remote, dense forest habitats, we fill this gap in knowledge by compiling multiple sources of evidence on fluctuations in WLP abundance throughout the species' range and analyzing the extent, timing and periodicity of documented disappearances.

Literature review and expert reporting of disappearances

We conducted a questionnaire-based survey of experts through 2019 and reviewed the literature on WLP disappearances. We recorded 67 reports from experts on 43 independent WLP disappearances at 38 sites in 9 countries (S1, S2), occurring over a cumulative area of at least 50 million ha. Twenty-eight disappearance sites are in contiguous old growth forest in the Amazon region, nine in forest fragments in Atlantic Forest in southern Brazil and northern Argentina, and one in rainforest in Guatemala (S1, S2). At small scales (<100,000 ha), we defined a disappearance as a sudden (from one 12-month period to the next) decline from previously documented (henceforth "normal") abundances to low abundance or absence. Over large areas and in the absence of intensive searching it is difficult to distinguish between low abundance and absence. We defined a disappearance as occurring when no or very few WLP are sighted for at least 3 years, and a reappearance as a return to normal population abundance for that region. For example, a density of 5 to 10 individuals per km 2 is low to normal in the Amazon 18, 19 , where high densities reach 100 or more individuals per km 2 (20) . Not all population declines had been documented continuously; in these cases, the absence periods were estimated by researchers. Regional or large scale (>1,000,000 ha) disappearances may occur gradually over 2 to 5 years, with the start of the event progressing outward from one area 21 .Two cases, one in Brazil and one in Guyana, illustrate rapid population crashes (S1). At Maracá Because researchers monitor a limited set of sites in a region, the true geographical extent of disappearances is usually not known. Nevertheless, we documented several cases of disappearances occurring at massive scales: 35% of the disappearances took place over areas larger than 1-million ha (S1). In French Guiana, WLPs disappeared over the entire 8-million ha territory (Fig. 1) . In Guyana, they disappeared over at least 5.4-million ha in the Rupununi region.In the northern Amazon of Brazil, WLPs disappeared over at least 4.8-million ha in Roraima state ( Fig. 1) . Madidi National Park in Bolivia and Manu National Park in Peru experienced disappearances over at least about 1-million and 1.7-million ha, respectively (S2).

Subsistence hunting and commercial pelt returns

We examined legal pelt trade records from 1932 to 2019 23,24 and subsistence hunting from 66 studies between 1965 and 2017 (S3) from the Southwestern (SW) Amazon. The combined dataset includes records of almost 2 million WLPs hunted for their hides and meat over an estimated 686 million ha over 88 years (Fig.1) . We accounted for variation in hunting effort by calculating the ratio of WLP to collared peccary (Pecari tajacu) pelts and kills, then used the ratio of WLPs hunted to the two-species total to detect fluctuations in WLP peccary returns independent of overall hunting effort. The two peccary species are among the most preferred species by subsistence hunters 9,25 and prices for their skins were nearly identical during the analysed period 23 . They differ in their socio-ecology; collared peccaries are territorial, less gregarious and form only small family groups (6 to 20 individuals) 26 . We modeled the fluctuations in the WLP ratio as a population fluctuation (see Online Methods section). Declines in WLP abundance occurred synchronously over the SW Amazon (Fig.1) . At least three large abundance variations occurred through time (Fig. 2) . Two peaks (1941 and 2006) were followed by rapid declines (late 1940s and late 2000s), while a third peak (1975) showed a more gradual decline, perhaps due to limited data during this period. Increases were gradualpopulation growth required over 20 years to reach population maxima-whereas the steeper slopes of two declines demonstrate large-scale, fast population crashes reaching minima after about 5 years over this huge area.

WLP population cycles

The compiled data from multiple sources on timing and spatial extent of WLP disappearance events and abundances reveal cycling in WLP populations at local, landscape and perhaps even continental scales, documenting an enigmatic population dynamic pattern for one of the most iconic Neotropical species, and one that is unexpected for any large forest mammal. WLP population cycles appear to last from 20 to 30 years from peak to peak, with a rapid population decline over 1 to 5 years, and an absence or low-abundance phase of 7 to 12 years followed by slow growth over about 20 years. Such population cycling is previously undocumented for any tropical mammal. Ungulate population dynamics in the temperate zone have been shown to be influenced by weather, interspecific interactions, and food resources 27, 28, 29 , but none of these exhibit cycles or even extreme highs and lows over time as documented here for WLPs. Although the WLP is highly susceptible to overhunting 30 , these population cycles are unlikely caused by hunting-most disappearances occurred in unpopulated, remote areas of contiguous forest.Although our data are restricted to recent history, WLP population cycling appears to have occurred for long enough through time to be incorporated into the cosmologies and beliefs of the indigenous people of the Amazon. Several ethnic groups describe disappearance events as linked to the death of a powerful shaman 6, 12 . The shaman, in anger with his people, upon his death takes the WLPs into an underground cavern and blocks the entrance. Their return can only be secured by another shaman using special cultural activities to unblock the entrance. This suggests that population fluctuations are a characteristic of the species.Periodicity in northern animal population dynamics has long been observed in nature 31 . However, the cause of population cycles has been a major unresolved issue in animal ecology for about a hundred years 1,31 . In general, cycling populations of vertebrates and insects show rapid decline phases and slow growth phases 1,32 , a pattern we document in our results. Research also indicates that three types of condition are necessary for a population to cycle 1,32 ; two of these-high reproductive rates and the potential for overcompensating density dependent mortality are easily identifiable in WLPs, while the third-a negative condition prolonged enough to delay recovery-is not readily apparent and could be expected to vary across the species vast range from South to Central America. To date, reports of disappearances unrelated to overhunting come only from Amazon and Atlantic forest in South America, and not from the Pantanal or Cerrado or most Central American locations.WLP's have a relatively high reproductive rate (1.67 young per litter, 250-day intervals between litters, 18 months age of first reproduction) 33 . Their gregarious nature and unusually large herd size with overlapping herd home ranges may set the conditions for rapid disease spread that locally eliminates entire populations 34 . In an analogous situation, humans have had to decrease social interactions and maintain social-distancing to isolate and slow the transmission of the COVID-19 virus 35 .WLP re-appearance consisting of gradually increasing numbers of individuals may result from population growth from a few remaining individuals or re-colonization 6 . Their obligate herding social structure may mean that populations cannot reach high growth rates until herds reach a threshold size; this, together with the need for immigration from other populations to re-establish local populations may be the factors that delay recovery, with variations in cycle length across the range influenced by external factors such as food availability or predator pressure. The period of absence or low abundance for WLP is around 7-12 years. The disappearance period was over 20 years in sites with high forest fragmentation due to anthropogenic impacts, suggesting that in the absence of dispersal, a population can become extinct. This supports the importance of dispersal in shaping the temporal and spatial scale of a cycle 1 . 

Survey

In January 2016 we sent out a questionnaire to 58 neotropical wildlife researchers, including all members of the IUCN/SSC Peccary Specialist Group. To complement the questionnaire, we conducted a Google Scholar search of the key words white-lipped peccary, Tayassu pecari and peccary and extracted the same information as from survey respondents for instances of multiyear, extensive area disappearances. Independent reports from the same date and location were consolidated as one event, while separate reports from the same or adjacent locations within a year of each other were retained in the data set but counted as single events. Disappearances at sites separated by 100 km were considered distinct events. We estimated the mean years of absence, SD and IQR for cases at sites >100,000 ha that were surrounded by contiguous forest. In cases where a range of time was provided, we used the average of the range.

Commercial pelt trade and subsistence hunting record

We examined legal pelt trade records from 1932 to 1969 from 379 cargo manifests, port registries and financial documents 23 , governmental statistics from Peru between 1946 and 2019 24 , and subsistence hunting records from 66 published and unpublished studies from 1965 to 2017 (S2) from the Southwestern Amazon. The combined dataset includes records of nearly 2 million WLPs hunted for their hides and meat over an estimated 686 million ha. We controlled for variation in hunting effort by calculating the ratio of WLP pelts and kills to other similarly preferred and priced species, the collared peccary (Tayassu tajacu). For each year and locality, we divided the number of WLP hunted by the total hunted of the two species. The resulted dataset contains 749 WLP hunting-proportions events for both commercial and subsistence purposes. We assume that the number of kills reflects the abundance of the species on the hunting grounds, and that when the number of hunted WLPs is low relative to collared peccary, the WLP populations are low and individuals are difficult to find and kill. Conversely, if the ratio of WLP to collared peccary is high, we assume that the WLP population is also high. Using the ratio of hunted WLP allowed the joint analysis of commercial and subsistence hunting data throughout time.

Population fluctuations analysis

We modeled the fluctuations of the WLP ratio through time as population fluctuations. The unknown proportion of the WLPs hunted in relation to collared peccary in year , for = 1932 to 2019, denoted by ! ( ), is assumed to be a smooth curve over time. Since the proportion varied between 0 and 1 we used a beta inflated distribution model, ( )~( ( ), , , , ) -a mixture distribution between beta and Bernoulli distributions that allows values 0 and 1 for the

