

Introduction: Well-written and especially suitable to a dedicated psychological trauma journal.

Methods:

Sample: The number of nurses in Lithuania for the Year 2017 was 21903 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK545719/). Taking this number into account (as the authors claim they have invited all the nurses in Lithuania to participate in the study). Meaning that the true response rate is: 206 / 21903 < 1% (less than one percent).The sample produced is a convenience sample in a cross-sectional design. The sample is not representative of the HCW population as the author wrote in the limitations section of the study but also maybe skewed as the nurses enrolled themselves into a clinical trial. Hence, the ability to generalize is questionable.Measurements: The authors used a well-known and validated scales.Regarding diagnosis, the IADQ doesn't give a clinical diagnosis but rather probable PTSD/CPTSD (DSO) . MIOS, the authors should state how many refused to state PMIE's as this may skew the results.There is a lack of crucial data regarding nurses: 1. Years of experience of the nurses. 2. Missing of hospital setting namely department (There is major difference between departments in the hospital in terms of burden, stress and the PMIE's they elicit (e.g., ER is different from oncology etc.). This goes beyond the nurse's specialty.Traumatic Events -Did you use the LEC-5? ITEM? Another index? Please specify. If you have modified an existing index, please indicate that, and present the list of traumatic events used in the modified scale.The issue of missing values needs to be addressed as it may jeopardize the conclusions of the study. How many missing values you had in each scale?Statistical Analysis: Well-written.Results: as 97.1% were female, did you omit the male nurses from the analyses? Please omit the paragraph: "MI was more common in nurses diagnosed with CPTSD compared to nurses with PTSD, however, the difference between two groups did not reach statistical significance, t(38) = -2.013, p = .051.". This may mislead the reader.A major problem in the results section is the breaching of power. In the methods section you wrote: "require at least 187 participants". There is a contradiction with the following analysis: "The SEM model fit was found to be acceptable, (χ2 (123) = 219.718, p < .001, CFI/TLI = .937/.922, RMSEA [90% CI] = .0562 [.048, .075] , and SRMR = .049).". Discussion: Well-written.Conclusion: Considering my critique and the study limitation, I cannot recommend the paper to be publication in the BMJ Open. As suggested above, there are more suitable outlets for the paper.Reference: The reference list should be written according to the BMJ Open guidelines.Sample: The number of nurses in Lithuania for the Year 2017 was 21903 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK545719/). Taking this number into account (as the authors claim they have invited all the nurses in Lithuania to participate in the study).Meaning that the true response rate is: 206 / 21903 < 1% (less than one percent).

REVIEWER

Crawford, Mike Imperial College London, Psychological Medicine REVIEW RETURNED 21-Dec-2021Ben-Ezra, Menachem Ariel University, Social Work REVIEW RETURNED 19-Mar-2022Crawford, Mike Imperial College London, Psychological Medicine REVIEW RETURNED 29-Mar-2022

GENERAL COMMENTS

The authors of this clearly written manuscript present the results of a cross-sectional analysis of baseline data from a randomised controlled trial of online support for nursing staff, conducted during the current COVID pandemic.1) The authors have made claims about the need for interventions to support nursing staff without having provided data on the costs, benefits or costs effectiveness of these interventions.On line 42 (of the abstract), the authors state that because one in five nurses have PTSD/CPTSD there is a 'need for risk screening for traumatic stress in healthcare' settings. This may be true but no data are presented on the impact of routine screening for these conditions.Similarly, at the end of the discussion section of the paper, the authors state that high levels of stress among nurses mean that 'emotional support interventions (including the internet-delivered interventions) are needed'. The team have not yet completed their trial. So, while I think it is reasonable to conclude that support interventions need to be developed and tested, isn't it premature to conclude they are needed (the trial may show no benefit).2) As a cross-sectional study, the data presented make it difficult to determine whether the associations reported are causal. I think this limitation should be acknowledged in the discussion section of the report and highlighted in the text box on strengths and weaknesses.3) 206 nurses took part in the study (well below the 600 that the team aimed to recruit). It would be good to know how many nurses were invited to take part in the study.4) The report does not list other exclusion criteria that are included in the protocol for the trial, such experienced interpersonal violence or high risk of suicide. It is important that ALL study exclusion criteria are listed in the paper. It would be good if consideration could be given to these exclusions in the discussion section of the paper.The manuscript "The mediating role of moral injury on ICD-11 post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and complex PTSD among nurses" describes the findings of a cross-sectional study of moral injury on a number of clinically relevant variables in nurses. While the arguments posed in the manuscript are well articulated, I have a number of concerns for the statistical analyses (listed below). Namely, the authors claim mediation, however no test of mediation is conducted. Indeed, no test of mediation can be conducted given the cross-sectional nature of the data. The model may be statically sound otherwise; however, it does not test what the authors claim it tests. I suggest the authors re-frame their paper to account for this difference in interpretation. Mediation also requires temporally ordered data. Mediation is not something that can be tested in cross-sectional data as these path components are mathematically identical to simple confounding effects unless the data has a temporal ordering (MacKinnn et al., 2000) . Mediation tests assessed on cross-sectional data are also highly bias in their estimates (Maxwell & Cole, 2007) . Therefore, mediation cannot be tested within this data set. The Authors have addressed the issues I've raised in a satisfactory manner.Pending a final proofreading and minor corrections in English the paper is suitable for publication.The team have made a number of helpful changes to the paper following reviewer feedback. Just one remaining comment: I do not believe that sufficient evidence is provided in this paper or in the extant literature to justify the statement that there is a need to screen nurses for PTSD. Screening alone will not help nurses with PTSD and no evidence is provided about the impact of interventions in this setting. I suggest that this recommendation is removed from the conclusions in the abstract and the main text of the report.The manuscript "Associations between moral injury and ICD-11posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and complex PTSD among help-seeking nurses: a cross-sectional study" has been significantly updated since the last iteration and I feel that the authors made a genuine attempt at addressing my concerns. The additional wording in the manuscript is helpful and the title change is appropriate. I find the manuscript much improved, however a new concern has presented itself regarding correlated error terms. See comments below. (MacCallum et al., 1992 , Landis et al., 2009 Hayduk, 2014; Hermida, 2015) . That being said, a small number of correlated residuals in a large model might be tolerable, or if these residuals are due to study design factors, then they should be included (Cole et al., 2007; Malang-Indonesia, 2014) . Indeed, in certain longitudinal models, correlated residuals are expected and routinely assumed. However, in the current manuscript I can see no justification for the large number of additional correlated residuals, but perhaps the authors are aware of some quality of the MIOS that I am not which allows for these correlated residuals (i.e., is there a solid theoretical justification for these correlated errors above and beyond the fact that the latent variable did not account for these correlations?). 1. The author comments to me in the previous iteration regarding the retrospective aspects of the survey structure allowing for mediation claims is a solid argument. I think this should be stated explicitly within the manuscript.

Minor comments

The columns of table 1 refer to people with 'no diagnosis'. But presumably people in this group could have anxiety/ depression or other common mental health conditions.'Mobbing' is included as a traumatic eventdo the team mean bullying?The sample size calculation that is presented, is not the same as in the one in the protocol for the clinical trial. It would be helpful if details of the package used to calculate the sample size could be added. 

VERSION 1 -AUTHOR RESPONSE

Reviewer: 1Prof. Menachem Ben-Ezra, Ariel UniversityComments to the Author:General comments: The paper is a survey taken from the initial phase of a clinical trial (recruitment phase). The paper examines the associations between potential moral injury and PTSD/CPTSD (DSO) based on the ICD-11. While the paper is timely and with importance. The paper is of little relevance to the BMJ Open in terms of content and methodology. As such, it fails to meet the criteria for publication in the BMJ Open for surveys in terms of response rate (At least 65% response rate) and sampling. The cross-sectional design and the low number of participants are major flaws.Most survey samples that are published in general medical journals starting with four figures and above for the first wave.I believe that the paper will be warmly accepted to a dedicated journal focusing on psychological trauma such as: European Journal of Psychotraumatology, Journal of Traumatic Stress and (American Psychological association) APA's Psychological Trauma journal. Other options are psychiatric journals or nursing journals. The BMJ Open is too general for this study and fails to reach the majority of the readers.Abstract:The abstract is well-written. Healthcare Workers (HCW) should be spell out. The abstract point to a cross-sectional survey rather than a clinical trial. The sample is composed from the participants in the screening phase of the clinical trial and the time of data collection suggest that it is before the intervention took place.Author response (AR). Thank you for the comment, we have spelled out the "HCWs". The current study was conducted as a part of a larger scientific project with several clinical trials. However, in this paper we have presented the results based on the cross-sectional data. Therefore, we present this study as having a cross-sectional design.

R1

Strengths and weakness: Reading this section strengthen my argument above.Introduction: Well-written and especially suitable to a dedicated psychological trauma journal.The sample produced is a convenience sample in a cross-sectional design. The sample is not representative of the HCW population as the author wrote in the limitations section of the study but also maybe skewed as the nurses enrolled themselves into a clinical trial. Hence, the ability to generalize is questionable.Measurements: The authors used a well-known and validated scales.Regarding diagnosis, the IADQ doesn't give a clinical diagnosis but rather probable PTSD/CPTSD (DSO). MIOS, the authors should state how many refused to state PMIE's as this may skew the results.AR. We aimed to use the validated and reliable measures for our study variables. The International Trauma Questionnaire is one of the most widely used measures for screening of ICD-11 PTSD and CPTSD. There are a lot of studies showing good psychometric properties of the ITQ, including in the Lithuanian language, and it can be used for screening of PTSD/CPTSD. In our SEM analysis we use a dimensional approach to traumatic stress, and we included not a binary diagnosis status, but symptom intensity. In addition, based on the ITQ results we have extracted groups of nurses who are at a high risk for PTSD as well as CPTSD. We have added this to the Data analysis section to add clarity.As far as PMIEs are concerned, participants were asked to report whether they had been exposed to at least one PMIE in their work (lines 212-217). Additionally, as we have mentioned in the description of the MIOS, nurses were offered an option to disclose the content of PMIE. We have already extracted and reported the themes of received information regarding the content of PMIE. However, based on your comment, we have specified that 3 participants were unable to reveal the content of PMIE (lines 222-223).Traumatic Events -Did you use the LEC-5? ITEM? Another index? Please specify. If you have modified an existing index, please indicate that, and present the list of traumatic events used in the modified scale.AR. As we mention in our paper, the list of potentially traumatic events developed by the authors of the study was used in the study. We have also reported which potentially traumatic events are included in the aforementioned list in the manuscript. The screening for trauma exposure used in our study covers all major potentially traumatic experiences categories.

AR.

Thank you for your comments and suggestions for our manuscript. The sample is not a representative and we have highlighted this fact as a limitation of our study. However, as we have mentioned in our manuscript, the study was widely announced and a help-seeking, self-referred sample of healthcare specialists working in various units.Our study was conducted as a part of a larger project focused on medical staff stress recovery psychosocial intervention. Hence, the sample of help-seeking nurses was recruited. Additionally, we have specified the information regarding the study sample in the title of the revised manuscript. We point this out as one of limitations of the study.We have reported study participants' work experience in Table 1 . Additionally, medical specialties were described according to the department nurses worked at.Licensed nurses from all regions of Lithuania were invited to participate in the current study and we did not omit the male nurses. However, in Lithuania female gender is predominant among nurses, and that is reflected in our study results.Thank you for the comment, we have specified the sentence as you recommend to add clarity.Thank you for raising the concern regarding the statistical power of the analysis. The number of participants needed for the analysis was estimated before the analysis as a step for power estimation. As far as we understand your question, in SEM analysis, the degrees of freedom in the model estimation (df = 123) are referred to. As degrees of freedom are interlinked with the number of participants (df = n -the number of estimated parameters), in our analysis, it is still very high to obtain trustful model fit and sufficient statistical power. Nevertheless, in the revised manuscript, we have now indicated more clearly that the number in parenthesis indicates the degrees of freedom of SEM analysis.Thank you for your recommendation. We updated the reference list to meet the publication style of BMJ Open journal Reviewer: 2Thank you very much for this important comment. We have now provided the indirect effects in the results section of the revised manuscript. We have also updated the Statistical analyses section and described how the indirect effects were computed.We do agree that the study has limitations, as the data collected does not have a perfect fit for the mediation analysis approach. However, although the data was collected at the single time-point, some of the variables used represent the retrospective nature of the data and has some indication of ordering in time. For example, trauma exposure is measured in a lifetime perspective, daily stress -in one year perspective, when symptoms of moral injury and PTSD/CPTSD are measured in a perspective of one month. Nevertheless, we have now addressed this issue in the limitation section and acknowledged that the results of the current study should be interpreted cautiously and replicated by using longitudinal study design.Thank you for a valid point. We used a unidimensional BDSS scale which was presented in the unpublished manuscript. Since BMJ OPEN does not allow to refer to unpublished papers, we only have mentioned the authors of the paper in the text.We have included the information about the softwares used in data analyses (page 8).Thank you for the comment. Indeed, when running CFA, we included eight residual covariances, as suggested by model fit indices. Same residual covariances were included in SEM analysis. We have now indicated the number of residual covariances included in the method section when presenting the MIOS measure as well as describing the SEM model. All factor loadings of MIOS items in SEM analysis ranged between .34 and .83 with factor loadings of two items below .40.

R1.

There is a lack of crucial data regarding nurses: 1. Years of experience of the nurses. 2. Missing of hospital setting namely department (There is major difference between departments in the hospital in terms of burden, stress and the PMIE's they elicit (e.g., ER is different from oncology etc.). This goes beyond the nurse's specialty.The issue of missing values needs to be addressed as it may jeopardize the conclusions of the study. How many missing values you had in each scale?AR. The data contained no missing values since it was mandatory to provide the requested information in an online data collection.Please omit the paragraph: "MI was more common in nurses diagnosed with CPTSD compared to nurses with PTSD, however, the difference between two groups did not reach statistical significance, t(38) = -2.013, p = .051.". This may mislead the reader.A major problem in the results section is the breaching of power. In the methods section you wrote: "require at least 187 participants". There is a contradiction with the following analysis: "The SEM model fit was found to be acceptable, (χ2 ( 

R1. Statistical Analysis: Well-written.

Results: as 97.1% were female, did you omit the male nurses from the analyses?

R.1

Discussion: Well-written.Conclusion: Considering my critique and the study limitation, I cannot recommend the paper to be publication in the BMJ Open. As suggested above, there are more suitable outlets for the paper.Reference: The reference list should be written according to the BMJ Open guidelines.

Mr. Robert Moulder, University of Virginia

Comments to the Author:The manuscript "The mediating role of moral injury on ICD-11 post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and complex PTSD among nurses" describes the findings of a cross-sectional study of moral injury on a number of clinically relevant variables in nurses. While the arguments posed in the manuscript are well articulated, I have a number of concerns for the statistical analyses (listed below). Namely, the authors claim mediation, however no test of mediation is conducted. Indeed, no test of mediation can be conducted given the cross-sectional nature of the data. The model may be statically sound otherwise; however, it does not test what the authors claim it tests. I suggest the authors re-frame their paper to account for this difference in interpretation.Major Comments:1.Title -The title of the manuscript includes the word "mediation" however no mediation effects are tested in the manuscript, so this claim cannot be made. See comments below for further clarification.Author response (AR). Thank you for the comment. We have revised the title of our manuscript. We excluded mediation from the title and added design of the study.

R2. 2.

Page 8, Statistical Analysis -I find quite a few problems with the authors' data analysis approaches. While the series of t-tests appear fine, the structural equation model and its interpretation is concerning foe the following reasons: 2.1. A mediation test requires the testing of indirect effects. None such tests are reported in the manuscript. An indirect effect is a product of all effects along a mediation path. SEM programs such as AMOS, MPLUS, lavaan, and OpenMx have this functionality and will give p-values associated with this newly defined parameter. Simply showing that a model with a possible mediation path shows adequate fit is not sufficient to determine mediation. See Gunzler et al. (2013) and Holbert & Stephenson (2003) for a review of methods. Direct effects, total effects, and proportion of total effect mediated should also be reported.Page 8, Statistical Analysis -Please include the software used for all statistical analyses.

R2. 2.2.

Mediation also requires temporally ordered data. Mediation is not something that can be tested in cross-sectional data as these path components are mathematically identical to simple confounding effects unless the data has a temporal ordering (MacKinnn et al., 2000) . Mediation tests assessed on cross-sectional data are also highly bias in their estimates (Maxwell & Cole, 2007) . Therefore, mediation cannot be tested within this data set.

R2. Minor Comments:

1.Pg. 8, line 175 -There is no citation for the BDSS scale. In searching online, I believe I have found the scale, but it has 3 subscales. Please provide the alpha for each subscale as well if this is the case.

R2. 3.

Page 8, Statistical Analysis -Please report the percent missing data in the SEM because fit indices are influenced proportional to the degree of missing data with FIML estimation (Zhang & Savalei, 2022) AR. The data contained no missing values due to the data collection strategy, it was mandatory to provide responses to all requested information in our online data collection platform for this study.

R2. 4.

Page 8, Statistical Analysis -Factor loadings are not shown for the "moral injury" latent variable. Nor are variance components shown for the model. Without showing the factor loadings in either the diagram or a table, I am unable to tell if correlated residuals are used. Such residuals would artificially inflate model fit.

REVIEW RETURNED

03-Apr-2022

VERSION 2 -AUTHOR RESPONSE

Reviewer: 1Prof. Menachem Ben-Ezra, Ariel UniversityComments to the Author:The Authors have addressed the issues I've raised in a satisfactory manner.Pending a final proofreading and minor corrections in English the paper is suitable for publication.high chance of erroneous findings based upon capitalization on chance (MacCallum et al., 1992 , Landis et al., 2009 Hayduk, 2014; Hermida, 2015) . That being said, a small number of correlated residuals in a large model might be tolerable, or if these residuals are due to study design factors, then they should be included (Cole et al., 2007; Malang-Indonesia, 2014) . Indeed, in certain longitudinal models, correlated residuals are expected and routinely assumed. However, in the current manuscript I can see no justification for the large number of additional correlated residuals, but perhaps the authors are aware of some quality of the MIOS that I am not which allows for these correlated residuals (i.e., is there a solid theoretical justification for these correlated errors above and beyond the fact that the latent variable did not account for these correlations?).

