

I n p r e s s high as 5.6% for China and 15.2% outside of China (6) . COVID-19 spreads easily from person to person (7) (8) (9) . Hospitals should screen patients with suspected COVID-19 in order to keep infected patients strictly isolated from noninfected patients and healthcare workers. Real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay is currently the gold standard for diagnosing COVID-19. However, RT-PCR is suboptimal for rapid triaging: it takes several hours before results become available and sensitivity of the test may be insufficient to reliably exclude COVID-19 (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) . Accordingly, RT-PCR testing should be repeated in patients with a negative initial result and persistent clinical suspicion of COVID-19 (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) . Chest CT may be an attractive alternative or adjunct to RT-PCR testing, because it can be performed rapidly. A study among more than 1000 Chinese patients reported that chest computed tomography (CT) has a high sensitivity for the diagnosis of COVID-19 and that it may currently be considered as a primary tool for COVID-19 detection in epidemic areas (15) . The promising results of Ai et al.'s study (15) and the clinical need for a fast screening tool have led to the introduction of chest CT for patients with suspected COVID-19 in our hospital mid-March 2020. From initial experience, we have learned that the interpretation of chest CT in patients with suspected in frontline clinical practice is not always straightforward. This can be attributed to the relative lack of experience in interpreting chest CT in suspected COVID- 19 (16) However, this proposed system has not been evaluated yet, to our knowledge. Therefore, the purpose of our study was to evaluate the RSNA chest CT classification system for reporting pneumonia.

Methods

This retrospective study was approved by the institutional review board of our hospital (Zuyderland Medical Center, Heerlen/Sittard/Geleen, The Netherlands) (IRB number Z2020061) and patients' consents were waived.

Patients and CT protocol

Consecutive patients who presented with clinical suspicion of COVID-19 (i.e. fever, cough, and/or shortness of breath (17)) in our hospital between March 12, 2020 and March 23, 2020 were potentially eligible for inclusion. Most patients had severe clinical symptoms and were being considered for hospitalization. Patients with known COVID-19 (proven by RT-PCR testing) before CT scanning, were excluded. Cases who did not comply with the reference standard (see paragraph below) were also excluded. The first 60 patients were already reported in our pilot study which 

RSNA chest CT classification system for reporting COVID-19 pneumonia

Four categories for standardized reporting of chest CT findings related to COVID-19were proposed by the RSNA Expert Consensus Statement (16), i.e. "typical", "indeterminate", "atypical", and "negative" ( Table 1 ). Examples of "typical" and "indeterminate" CT imaging features for COVID-19 are shown in Figures 1 and 2, respectively.

CT analysis

CT scans were retrospectively and independently read by two chest radiologists (initials blinded for review) with 5 and 22 years of experience in chest CT interpretation, and by a fifth-year radiology resident (initials blinded for review), using the RSNA chest CT classification system (16) as mentioned in the previous paragraph. Before chest CT interpretation, the readers studied the literature with regard to the typical chest CT imaging features of COVID-19 pneumonia (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) . At the time of chest CT interpretation, the readers were only aware of age, gender, and the clinical information as provided by the referring physician.

COVID-19 Reporting and Data System (CO-RADS)

In an additional analysis, all chest CT scans were also analyzed according to the 

Reference standard

Nasal and pharyngeal swabs were collected for RT-PCR testing directly after chest CT. Patients with a negative initial RT-PCR result and persistent clinical suspicion (note that results of the first RT-PCR were available after 4 hours) were retested.Patients with any positive RT-PCR result were considered to be infected with COVID-19, whereas patients with (persistent) negative RT-PCR result(s) were considered not to be infected with COVID-19.

Statistical analysis

Degree of interobserver agreement was evaluated by calculating weighted kappa (ĸ) coefficients. ĸ coefficients of 0-0.20, 0.21-0.40, 0.41-0.60, 0.61-0.80, and 0.81-1.00 were considered to indicate none to slight, fair, moderate, substantial, and almost perfect agreement, respectively (24) . Proportion of patients with RT-PCR confirmed COVID-19 in each of the chest CT categories was calculated for each of the readers.A one-way analysis of variance was conducted to assess whether there were differences in patient's duration of symptoms between the four categories of the RSNA chest CT classification system in patients with RT-PCR confirmed COVID-19.Analyses were executed using Microsoft Excel 2010 (Redmond, WA, USA) andMedCalc statistical software version 12.6.0 (MedCalc Software, Ostend, Belgium).

I n p r e s s

The patient selection flow diagram is displayed in Figure 3 . One hundred and nine consecutive patients were potentially eligible for inclusion. Thirteen of the 109 patients were excluded because they did not comply with the reference standard (12 patients did not undergo RT-PCR testing, whereas 1 patient with negative initial RT-PCR result and persistent clinical suspicion did not undergo repeated RT-PCR testing). The number of patients assigned to categories "typical", "indeterminate", "atypical", and "negative" of the RSNA chest CT classification system (16) by the three readers ranged from 18-29, 26-43, 19-31, and 5-8, respectively (Table 2) . ĸ coefficients between pairs of each of the three readers are displayed in Table 3 . Using the RSNA chest CT classification system, there was substantial interobserver agreement between the chest radiologists (ĸ coefficient of 0.663) and moderate interobserver agreement between the chest radiologists and the fifth-year radiology resident (ĸ coefficients of 0.570 and 0.564). Proportion of patients with RT-PCR confirmed COVID-19 in each of the categories of the RSNA chest CT classification system (16) , as assigned by the readers, varied as follows: "typical": 76.9%-96.6%, "indeterminate": 51.2%-64.1%, "atypical": 2.8%-5.3%, and "negative": 20%-25% Using CO-RADS, there was substantial interobserver agreement between the chest radiologists (ĸ coefficient of 0.773), and between the chest radiologists and the fifth-year radiology resident (ĸ coefficients of 0.658 and 0.648) (Supplemental Table   1 ). Proportion of patients with RT-PCR confirmed COVID-19 in each of the categories of CO-RADS (23) varied as follows: CO-RADS 5: 81.8%-96.7%, CO-RADS 4: 33.3%-76.9%, CO-RADS 3: 34.6%-50%, CO-RADS 2: 3.1%-5.6%, and CO-RADS 1: 11.1%-22.2% (Supplemental Figure 1 ).

Discussion

At present, the role of chest CT in diagnosing COVID-19 is not completely clear. by the RSNA may provide radiologists and referring clinicians guidance and confidence in reporting these findings and a more consistent framework to improve clarity (16) .The four-category RSNA chest CT classification system for reporting COVID-19 pneumonia was based on current literature and expert consensus (16) . We found substantial interobserver agreement between chest radiologists and moderate interobserver agreement between chest radiologists and a fifth-year radiology resident when using this system in patients with suspected COVID-19. It should be noted, however, that the proportion of RT-PCR confirmed COVID-19 cases in the categories "atypical appearance" and "negative for pneumonia" was non-negligible. Interestingly, the proportion of RT-PCR confirmed COVID-19 cases was lower in the "atypical appearance" category (2.8% to 5.3%) than in the "negative for pneumonia" category (20% to 25%). This can be explained by the facts that this study included symptomatic patients (i.e. fever, cough, and/or shortness of breath) and that the "atypical appearance" category also included abnormalities consistent with another lung disease (not COVID-19). Therefore, the prevalence of diseases other than COVID-19 (e.g., bacterial lobar pneumonia, bronchial and bronchiolar infections, and typical cardiogenic pulmonary edema) was considerably higher in the "atypical appearance" category than in the "negative for pneumonia" category, whereas the opposite was true for the prevalence of COVID-19 between these two categories. On I n p r e s s the other hand, as expected, the proportion of RT-PCR confirmed COVID-19 cases increased from categories "indeterminate", to "typical" for all readers.At the time of conducting the current study, another chest CT classification scale for diagnosing COVID-19 pneumonia was circulating around in The Netherlands, CO-RADS, which has recently been published (23) . The RSNA chest CT classification system for reporting COVID-19 pneumonia (16) and CO-RADS are very similar (categories "typical", "indeterminate", "atypical", and "negative for pneumonia" of the RSNA chest CT classification system (16) are essentially equal to CO-RADS categories 5, 4-3, 2, and 1(23), respectively). Not surprisingly, there were no real differences when using CO-RADS (23).Our study has some potential limitations. First, because of the limited availability of RT-PCR kits in our hospital, it was not feasible to retest all patients with negative initial RT-PCR result. Accordingly, only 19 of 52 patients (37%) with initial negative RT-PCR underwent repeated RT-PCR. However, according to our reference standard, all patients with persistent clinical suspicion were retested. Second, each of the three readers assigned relatively few patients (5 up to 8) to the "negative for pneumonia" category of the RSNA chest CT classification system (16) . The relatively limited sample size in this category can be explained because most patients had severe clinical symptoms and were being considered for hospitalization. Third, the prevalence of COVID-19 was relatively high (47%) in our study population. The proportion of RT-PCR confirmed COVID-19 cases in each of the categories may be different in areas with different COVID-19 prevalence. Fourth, there was a wide variation in duration of symptoms before chest CT (median of 7 days [range 2-21 days]), whereas it is known that chest CT appearance of COVID-19 can dramatically change over time (28) . However, this variation reflects clinical practice, as some I n p r e s s patients present earlier in the course of the disease while other patients present later in the course of the disease. In addition, there were no significant differences in patient's duration of symptoms between the four chest CT categories. Fifth, our study has a retrospective design. A prospective study is needed to validate our findings in an independent and larger sample of patients.In conclusion, the RSNA chest CT classification system for reporting COVID-19 pneumonia has moderate to substantial interobserver agreement. However, radiologists and clinicians should take into account that the proportion of RT-PCR confirmed COVID-19 cases in the categories "atypical appearance" and "negative for pneumonia" is non-negligible. I n p r e s s I n p r e s s Tables   Table 1. RSNA chest CT classification system for reporting COVID-19 pneumonia (adopted from reference (16)).

Rationale CT Findings

Typical 

