INTRODUCTION

SARS-CoV-2 is a beta-coronavirus belonging to the same family as severe acute respiratory coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), which share similar structural features including the spike glycoprotein which has been the primary target of vaccine development for each of these viruses [1] . Although the rollout of the EUA vaccines has been underway for several months, global distribution of these vaccines has fallen along entrenched socioeconomic lines, leaving many low-and middle-income countries with inadequate supply [2] . For successful global coverage, many more vaccines will be needed. The rapid expansion of SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern (VOC) has corresponded with a reduction in neutralizing antibody activity in convalescent and vaccinated individuals, suggesting that emerging mutations observed in some lineages are associated with immune escape [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] .Alarmingly, the Beta (B.1.351) variant has demonstrated a reduced sensitivity to neutralizing sera from convalescent and immunized individuals [7] . It has been observed that vaccine effectiveness (either BNT162b2 or ChAdOx1 nCoV- 19) was notably lower against the now dominant Delta (B.1.617.2) variant, compared to the Alpha (B.1.1.7) variant [8] . Most recently, the highly mutated Omicron VOC has demonstrated further evasion of the existing humoral immunity to SARS-CoV-2 in the global population. The combination of viral escape mechanisms and waning immunity suggest that heterologous prime-boost strategies may be needed to provide sufficient coverage against novel variants [9] .Synthetic DNA vaccines offer multiple advantages over other vaccine platforms including shortened clinical development timetables for vaccines against emerging infectious diseases, ability to scale up manufacture, and long-term temperature stability that facilitates rapid and efficient deployment in resource-limited settings [10] [11] [12] . We have previously described the design of a synthetic DNA vaccine encoding the wild-type (Wuhan-Hu-1) Spike protein,  which is currently in clinical evaluation [10] . In preclinical studies we have shown vaccination induces antigen-specific T cell responses and functional antibodies that neutralize and confer protection against SARS-CoV-2 [10, [13] [14] [15] [16] . In a non-human primate (NHP) challenge model, INO-4800 vaccination was associated with reduced viral loads and protection against respiratory tract disease [13, 14] . Phase 1 and 2 clinical trials of INO-4800 demonstrated a favorable safety and tolerability profile and immunogenicity [17, 18] .In response to the increasing number of SARS-CoV-2 VOCs demonstrating evasion of vaccineor infection-induced humoral immunity, we have designed INO-4802, a next-generation DNA vaccine expressing a pan-Spike immunogen. INO-4802 was designed using the SynCon strategy with the goal of driving neutralizing coverage against multiple VOCs, as described previously [16] . INO-4802 raises immunity across SARS-CoV-2 VOCs in mice and confers broad protection in hamsters following intranasal challenge with multiple VOCs including Alpha, Beta, Gamma, and Delta [16] .Prime-boost regimens are widely used in the development of vaccines against a variety of infectious diseases [19, 20] , including DNA and viral-vector based approaches [21, 22] . DNA vaccines have particular advantages in the prime-boost setting where they have been shown to enhance both humoral and cellular responses without inducing anti-vector immunity [23] . In the boost setting DNA vaccines were found to be superior to the adenovirus platform in expanding responses to simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) antigens in rhesus macaques [24] . In the clinic, the DNA platform is not limited by the same dose-dependent reactogenicity observed following administration of lipid nanoparticles carrying mRNA vaccines [25] , which may be an important consideration in booster acceptance.In the current study, we investigated the durability and memory recall of antigen-specific SARS-CoV-2 responses in a cohort of non-human primates that were initially primed with the first- to the induction of antigen-specific T cells and potent neutralizing antibody responses across multiple SARS-CoV-2 VOCs that correlated with ACE2 blocking activity. These data highlight the capability of DNA vaccines to boost SARS-CoV-2 immunity.

Durability of SARS-CoV-2-specific humoral response following immunization with INO-4800

Initial studies investigated the durability of immune responses in non-human primates (NHPs) primed with INO-4800. NHPs were immunized at week 0 and 4 with either a 1 mg or 2 mg dose of INO-4800, and blood was collected over the course of one year ( Figure 1A) . It should be noted that, for Figure 1 and Supplemental Figure 1 , the NHPs were initially treated on staggered schedules, and therefore the data from the prime immunization portion of the study will show collected data points for NHP IDs #7544, 7545, 7546, 7548, 7550 terminating at Week 35 and for others, IDs #7514, 7520, 7523, 7524, terminating at Week 52. To measure levels of binding antibodies in the sera we used an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Peak antibody titers were observed at week 6 with a geometric mean endpoint titer of 258,032, two weeks following the second immunization ( Figure 1B) . Detectable levels of binding antibodies persisted in the serum for the duration of the study, and at the final timepoint prior to boosting, the 1 mg dose group had geometric mean endpoint titers of 11143 for the S1+S2 ECD. The 2 mg dose group had geometric mean endpoint titers of 4525 for the S1+S2 ECD. Similar trends were also observed in the levels of binding antibodies against the SARS-CoV-2 S1, SARS-CoV-2 S2 and RBD proteins (Supplemental Figure 1 ).Functional antibody responses were measured in a pseudovirus neutralization assay against the SARS-CoV-2 ancestral, Alpha, Beta and Gamma variants of concern (VOCs) which were in circulation during this time period. Immunization with INO-4800 resulted in the induction of neutralizing antibodies that were increased over baseline for all VOCs (Figure 1C-F) . SARS-CoV-2 VOC neutralizing antibody responses were durable and remained elevated over baseline at the last collected timepoint, with the 1 mg dose group having a geometric mean titer (GMT) of 301 against ancestral SARS-CoV-2, 349 for Alpha, 158 for Beta, and 317 for Gamma. In Figure   1E , the authors note that NHP #7545 showed reduced neutralizing activity at Week 14 which was attributed to sampling error during plating. The 2 mg dose group had a GMT of 174.6 for the wildtype variant, 58.2 for Alpha, 100.3 for Beta, and 164.2 for Gamma. Together, these data illustrate that the primary INO-4800 vaccination schedule induced SARS-CoV-2 specific antibodies harboring neutralizing activity that were maintained over the period of 35 -52 weeks.

Humoral responses following delivery of either INO-4800 or INO-4802

We 

Induction of cellular responses by INO-4800 or INO-4802

Intracellular cytokine staining (ICS) was performed on peripheral blood mononuclear cells and IL-2 (3 of 5 animals and 2 of 5 animals, for ancestral and Beta respectively) ( Figure 3J-K) .

DISCUSSION

Emerging SARS-CoV-2 VOCs and waning immunity will likely lead to recurrent waves of COVID-19 disease [29] . The frequency and severity of future outbreaks will depend on several complex factors that will likely unfold differently across the world [30] . The duration of immunity following SARS-CoV-2 infection and vaccination will be a key determinant of future SARS-CoV-2 transmission dynamics [30] . Accumulating evidence suggests that durable immune responses are maintained in COVID-19 convalescent individuals and vaccinees [31] [32] [33] [34] . However, the emergence of SARS-CoV-2 variants capable of evading humoral immune responses [5, 35] highlights the potential need to update vaccines to mitigate the severity of future SARS-CoV-2 outbreaks. More broadly protective vaccines that can be administered as boosters may be critical [36] .Future studies will provide additional data on vaccine-mediated protection against Omicron and whether T cell immunity is maintained.Overall, the development of safe and effective booster vaccines will be critical in maintaining R., E.P., E.N.G., M.P., D.F., F.I.Z, A.K., declare no competing interests. J.N.W., B.S.,   K.S., I.M., Z.E., A.D., D.E., A.G., V.M.A., J.J.K., L.M.H., S.J.R., T.R.F.S., K.E 

Constructs

The plasmid designs for INO-4800 and INO-4802 have been previous described [10, 45] . For INO-4802, a SynCon® consensus sequence for the SARS-CoV-2 spike harboring focused RBD mutations and 2P mutation was codon-optimized using Inovio's proprietary optimization algorithm. The final sequence was subcloned into the pGX0001 vector (BamHI/XhoI) and synthesized (Genscript, Piscataway, NJ).

Animal Immunizations, sample collection

All rhesus macaque experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use by ID-EP. At the indicated time-points, blood was collected to analyse blood chemistry and to isolate peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and serum.

Peripheral blood mononuclear cell isolation and intracellular cytokine staining (ICS)

Blood was collected from each study animal into sodium citrate cell preparation tubes (CPT, BD Biosciences). The tubes were centrifuged to separate plasma and lymphocytes, according to the manufacturer's protocol. Samples from the prime immunization were transported by same-day shipment on cold-packs from Bioqual to The Wistar Institute, and boost samples were shipped overnight to Inovio Pharmaceuticals for PBMC isolation. PBMCs were washed, and residual red blood cells were removed using ammonium-chloride-potassium (ACK) lysis buffer. Cells were counted using a ViCell counter (Beckman Coulter) and cryopreserved in 90% fetal bovine serum (FBS) / 10% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). For ICS assays, cells were thawed in RPMI 1640 (Corning), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Seradigm), and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco).For ICS, following an overnight rest at 37°C, PBMCs (1x10 6 

Antigen Binding ELISA

Serum collected at each time point was evaluated for binding titers as previously described [10] .For prime immunization samples, ninety-six well immunosorbent plates (NUNC) were coated with 1ug/mL recombinant SARS-CoV-2 S1+S2 ECD protein (Sino Biological 40589-V08B1), S1 

Pseudovirus Neutralization Assay

SARS-CoV-2 pseudovirus stocks encoding for the wildtype, Alpha, Gamma, Beta, Delta, or Omicron Spike proteins were produced as previously described [10, 36] . To assess the extent of which neutralizing antibodies are present in the sera, CHO cells stably expressing ACE2 (ACE2-CHOs -Creative Biolabs) were used as target cells at 7,000 cells/well. Sera was heat inactivated and serially diluted prior to incubation with the different SARS-CoV-2 variant pseudoviruses. later, cells were lysed using Britelite plus Reporter Gene Assay System (PerkinElmer) and RLU was measured using an automated luminometer. Neutralization titers (ID 50 ) were calculated using GraphPad Prism 9 and defined as the reciprocal serum dilution that is reduced by 50% compared to the signal in the infected control wells.

Flow Cytometry

Thawed, cryopreserved PBMCs were assessed to determine the frequency of circulating T blocking activity across wild-type SARS-CoV-2 as well as multiple variants of concern. These data illustrate the durability of immunity following vaccination with INO-4800 and additionally support the use of either INO-4800 or INO-4802 in prime-boost regimens.

