INTRODUCTION

A current international health crisis is shaking the world due to the new severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) pandemic infection causing the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). The burden is not only on the health care system but also on our society putting our economy at risk. Although most infected individuals (approximately 80 %) show benign clinical signs, vulnerable and older people can show severe symptoms [1] . Amongst the various option to reduce the ongoing outbreak, rapid and early diagnosis of symptomatic and asymptomatic infected individuals are highly appreciated to rapidly quarantine the SARS-CoV-2 infected one's or to rapidly clinically enroll patient with severe symptoms. As the SARS-CoV-2 is a positive single-stranded RNA virus, virology laboratories can routinely detect with high sensitivity and specificity its viral genome present in various clinical samples by reverse-transcriptase qualitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR). A rapid researcher solidarity allowed to share not only genomic information (Wuhan-Hu-1, GenBank accession number MN908947) deposed on the Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID) but also in-house developed laboratory assay protocols to detect and identify the emerged coronavirus deposed among others on the WHO website [2, 3] .Based on their previous experiences, the team of C. Drosten together with an while detection of the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RnRP) sequence targeted more specifically the new SARS-CoV-2 genome [4] .In the absence of physical sources of positive control SARS-CoV-2 genomic sequence, quality controls of the clinical laboratory assays rely on documentation of their analytical qualification and validation.The impressive ongoing deployment of laboratory assay capacity by coordinated action of academic, public and private laboratories is however highly dependent of reagent availability. Indeed rapid lacks of specific commercial kits seriously impeded clinical laboratory diagnosis capacity. Rapidly, the additional support of fundamental research laboratories allowed to develop quality controlled diagnosis workflows. In Belgium, a veterinary research unit of the University of Namur (NARILIS) developed and provides an internal control, RNA extract containing Schmallenberg virus RNA genome, for each RT-qPCR reaction [5] . SARS-CoV-2 RT-qPCR are consequently only validated when a parallel RT-qPCR targeting the Schmallenberg virus RNA genome show positive results. Similar internal controls are also commercially available. Those controls allow to assess nucleic acid extraction quality and to verify the absence of PCR inhibitor or process error. Although their sequences have no similarities with the SARS-CoV-2 sequences, they are usually performed in time and reagent consuming parallel Taqman RT-qPCR assays, further increasing the risk of detection kit and reagent shortage [5] .The aim of this study was to provide validated procedures allowing to detect the SARS-CoV-2 and an internal control in a unique one-step duplex RT-qPCR. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 30, 2020. 

Real-time reverse transcription PCR

Reactions to detect SARS-CoV-2 E sequence were performed in 25 μL as described by Coupeau et al . [5] . Briefly, a 25 μL reaction contained RNAse free water, 5 μL 5X concentrated reaction master mix containing DNA polymerase, MgCl 2 and dNTP (Eurogentec Takyon One-Step No Rox Probe 5X MasterMix dTTP), 0.25 μL Euroscript II reverse transcriptase and RNAse inhibitor and 0.25 μL additive (both provided with the Eurogentec Takyon 5X MasterMix), 5 μL RNA and various concentration of primers and probes. In singleplex assays, primers and probes All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 30, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.20154153 doi: medRxiv preprint (targeting either the SARS-CoV-2 E or the Schmallenberg virus RNA) were at 400 nM and 200 nM final concentration, respectively, as previously described [5] . In duplex assays, the working concentration of primers and probe targeting the SARS-CoV-2 E sequence were at 100 nM and 50 nM, respectively, and the working 

Statistical analysis

The independent t student test for paired samples was used to verify the significance between the various Ct values obtained for same RNA samples in three RT-qPCR methods, and using the singleplex RT-qPCR as reference. This was performed using the Graphpad tools available on https://www.graphpad.com/quickcalcs/ttest2/. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 30, 2020. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 30, 2020. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 30, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.20154153 doi: medRxiv preprint CONCLUSION To save time and reagents, we recommend to perform a duplex one-step RT-qPCR reaction using either the Schmallenberg virus RNA extract or the Cy5 Diagenode Diagnosis as internal controls, using the conditions described in the Materials and Methods.All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 30, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.20154153 doi: medRxiv preprint the singleplex (simplex) onestep RT-qPCR reaction (used as reference for the statistical analysis), or in the duplex one-step RT-qPCR reaction using the Schmallenberg virus RNA extract as internal control or in the duplex one-step RT-qPCR reaction using the Cy5 Diagenode Diagnosis as internal control. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 30, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.28.20154153 doi: medRxiv preprint 

