

Introduction: Casirivimab-imdevimab, an antibody cocktail containing two severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 neutralizing antibodies, reduces the viral load and the risk of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)-related hospitalization or death. The objective of this study was to evaluate the clinical efficacy of casirivimab-imdevimab in patients with COVID-19 Delta variant in Japan. Methods: This study was conducted at five institutions and assessed a total of 461 patients with COVID-19 who met the inclusion criteria. The treatment group received a dose of casirivimab-imdevimab consisting of a cocktail of two monoclonal antibodies, (casirivimab 600 mg and imdevimab 600 mg intravenously). The control consisted of age-and sex-matched COVID-19 patients (n = 461) who sufficed the inclusion criteria but did not receive casirivimab-imdevimab. The outcome was the requirement of oxygen therapy. Results: In the treatment group, patients received oxygen therapy (n = 30), nasal canula (n = 23), high flow nasal cannula (n = 5), and mechanical ventilation (n = 2). In the control group, patients received oxygen therapy (n = 56), nasal canula (n = 45), high flow nasal cannula (n = 8), and mechanical ventilation (n = 3). The administration of oxygen therapy was significantly lower in the treatment group than the control group (6.5% vs. 12.1%, P = 0.0044). All these patients admitted to our hospitals and received additional therapy and recovered. Conclusions: Our results demonstrate that the casirivimab-imdevimab combination antibody treatment is associated with reduced rates of requiring oxygen therapy among high-risk patients with COVID-19 Delta variant.The novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) first emerged in December 2019, when a cluster of patients with pneumonia of unknown cause was recognized in Wuhan, China [1] . The spread of the virus was rapid and currently COVID-19 cases are present worldwide. SARS-CoV-2 can be spread by asymptomatic, pre-symptomatic, and symptomatic carriers. The optimal approach to treatment of COVID-19 is evolving. Randomized controlled trial data suggest a mortality benefit with corticosteroids as well as with tocilizumab or baricitinib and a possible clinical benefit with remdesivir [2] [3] [4] [5] . Based on the pathogenesis of COVID-19, approaches that target the virus itself are more likely to work early in the course of infection.Casirivimab-imdevimab, an antibody cocktail containing two SARS-CoV-2 neutralizing antibodies, reduces the viral load and the risk of COVID-19-related hospitalization or death from any cause, and resolves symptoms [6] [7] [8] [9] . Subcutaneous casirivimab-imdevimab prevented symptomatic COVID-19 and asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection in previously uninfected household contacts of infected persons [10] , and reduced the incidence of symptomatic COVID-19 over 28 days in infected household contacts [11] .Casirivimab-imdevimab was approved by the ministry of health and labor of Japan as a special occasion on July 2021, to prevent a severe form of the infection with hypoxia. From June 2021, a new lineage of SARS-CoV-2, the Delta (B.1.617.2) variant, spread rapidly throughout Japan, and there was 100% replacement of previous variants by the Delta variant by July 2021. The clinical efficacy of casirivimabimdevimab combination antibody treatment with large sample size has not been investigated in settings of Japan. This study evaluated the clinical efficacy of casirivimab-imdevimab in patients with COVID-19 Delta variant in Japan.The present study was conducted at five institutions (Kansai Medical University Hospital, Kansai Medical University Medical Center, Kansai Medical University Kori Hospital, Kansai Medical University Kuzuha Hospital, and Kansai Medical University Temmabashi General Clinic) between July 2021 and December 2021, and assessed a total of 461 patients with COVID-19. The following inclusion criteria, based on the package insert, were used to administer casirivimab-imdevimab: 1) positive SARS-CoV-2 antigen or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests of specimens taken from nasopharyngeal area within 72 h prior to enrollment, 2) compatible symptoms onset of no more than 7 days before administration, 3) oxygen saturation level at room air of more than 93%, and 4) the patient has at least one of the risk factors shown in Table 1 .(https://www.info.pmda.go.jp/go/pack/62505A0A1023_1_01/). Applicants with casirivimab-imdevimab are introduced and consulted to our hospitals from Follow-up Center in Osaka prefecture. The intravenous drip of casirivimab-imdevimab was done in short-term hospitalization for first two weeks to observe side effect. After that the intravenous drip was done in the outpatient department except for patients with low oxygen. In addition, we visited to the accommodation medical facility (hotel recuperation) of COVID-19 for the intravenous drip at the request of the health center. The treatment group received a dose of casirivimab-imdevimab consisting of a cocktail of two monoclonal antibodies, (casirivimab 600 mg and imdevimab 600 mg intravenously).We visited the accommodation medical facility of COVID-19 every day for provide medical care. Thus, we selected the patients recuperating in the accommodation medical facility as controls who sufficed the inclusion criteria but did not receive casirivimab-imdevimab. The main reason why patients does not want to be treated was anxiety about side effects. During the study period, there were 548 controls with median age of 48 years and 262 males. Most common risk factor was age ≥50 years old (n = 291), next to smoking history (n = 202), cardiovascular diseases including hypertension (n = 126), obesity with body mass index ≥30 kg/m 2 (n = 122), diabetes mellitus either type 1 or 2 (n = 89), hyperlipidemia (n = 74), chronic lung diseases including asthma (n = 63), chronic kidney disease including those on hemodialysis (n = 19), chronic liver failure (n = 17), immunosuppressed status including those on chemotherapy, organ transplants, poorly controlled human immunodeficiency virus infection, sickle cell anemia, thalassemia and long term use of immunosuppressive medication (n = 15) and late pregnancy (n = 15). Finally, we enrolled the 461 controls consisted of age-and sexmatched COVID-19 patients. Informed consent was obtained from all patients, and the study protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee of Kansai Medical University (approval number 2020319).The outcome was the requirement of oxygen therapy (either nasal canula, high flow nasal cannula (HFNC) oxygenation, or mechanical ventilation). We used Wilcoxon rank sum test for continuous variables, and Fisher's exact test for categorical variables.The characteristics of the treatment and the control groups are shown in Table 1 . The treatment patients received casirivimabimdevimab as outpatients (n = 289), as inpatients (n = 76), and at an accommodation medical facility (n = 96). Eighty-five patients had been vaccinated (BNT162b2 or mRNA-1273) against SARS-CoV-2, of which 71 patients had received one dose and 14 patients received two doses. Median time from symptom onset to treatment was four days. In contrast, median time from symptom onset to informed consent of treatment in control group was three days. There were no significant differences between the two groups for one risk factor.In the treatment group, patients received oxygen therapy (n = 30), nasal canula (n = 23), HFNC (n = 5), and mechanical ventilation (n = 2) ( Table 2 ). In the control group, patients received oxygen therapy (n = 56), nasal canula (n = 45), HFNC (n = 8), and mechanical ventilation (n = 3). The administration of oxygen therapy was significantly lower in the treatment group than the control group (6.5% vs. 12.1%, P = 0.0044). All these patients admitted to our hospitals and received additional therapy (remdesivir, baricitinib, and/or corticosteroids). No deaths observed in both groups.

COVID-19 Coronavirus disease 2019

RT-PCR Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction SARS-CoV-2 Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 [13, 14] . In Japan, however, the sub-lineage BA.2 is now becoming dominant. Casirivimab-imdevimab inhibited Omicron/BA.2, but the FRNT 50 , the titer of monoclonal antibodies required for a 50% reduction in the number of infectious foci, value of this combination therapy was higher by a factor of 43.0-143.6 for Omicron/BA.2 than for an ancestral strain and other variants of concern (Alpha, Beta, Gamma, and Delta variants) [15] .In conclusion, our results demonstrate that the casirivimabimdevimab combination antibody treatment is associated with reduced rates of requiring oxygen therapy among high-risk patients with COVID-19 Delta variant.

Ethical approval and consent to participate

The study protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee at Kansai Medical University and all participating facilities. Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants in the study.

Funding

No funding was received.

Author's contributions

All the authors conceived the study, participated in its design and coordination and collected and managed the data, including quality control. NM and YN drafted the manuscript, and all authors contributed substantially to its revision. All the authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Consent for publication

Not applicable.

Availability of data and materials

The data will not be shared with participant confidentiality.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.

