Introduction

As of June 20, 2020, there have been more than 8 million confirmed global cases of COVID-19, a respiratory illness caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Early indications suggest a case/infection fatality rate of between 0.5% to 2% [1, 2, 3, 4] with poor prognosis strongly dependent on comorbidity factors such as advanced age, diabetes, and other poor health conditions [5] . The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in the United States gives an overall current symptomatic case fatality ratio of 0.4% [6] while studies involving seroprevalence indicate a median infection fatality rate of 0.25% [7] . Canada has seen over 100,000 cases and the entire world has engaged in costly outbreak mitigation strategies to prevent excess deaths.Governments around the world have focused on controlling COVID-19 outbreaks primarily by reducing direct human-to-human contact through varying degrees of societywide lock-downs and strong social distancing measures. By limiting the opportunity for infectious contacts, the hope is that the infection rate will remain low enough to prevent medical support systems from becoming overwhelmed while also reducing the effective reproduction number of the disease. Evidence suggests that government lock-down strategies are having a positive effect [8] , but those strategies may also become prohibitively expensive in the not too distant future. An alternative outbreak controlling strategy to lock-downs is contact tracing with isolation. In this strategy, health authorities trace the human-to-human contacts of an infected person and isolate those contacts who are at risk having become infected. If the probability of isolating potentially infected contacts is high and the time to isolation is sufficiently short, contact tracing with isolation may offer better cost benefit performance relative to lock-downs in keeping society safe [9] .Modelling the spread of infectious diseases falls into two broad classes [10] : deterministic modelling, which captures the thermodynamic limit and large scale behaviour of the underlying epidemiological phenomenon, and stochastic modelling, which describes the microscopic statistical nature of the generative process. Traditional compartmental models (e.g., SIRD), usually expressed as a set of coupled ordinary differential equations, fall into the first class while branching processes, in which each infected individual randomly generates "offspring", belong to the second class. In this paper, we focus on a stochastic formulation of COVID-19 following [11] .In [11] , the authors develop a branching process to model contact tracing with isolation strategies. The model uses a negative binomial distribution to generate secondary cases produced by an infected individual with new infections assigned a time of infection through draws from a serial interval distribution. By truncating the serial interval distribution through isolation events, the authors show that in most of their scenarios contact tracing and case isolation is enough to control a new outbreak of COVID-19 within 3 months.While the construction in [11] provides a rich base for numerical simulations, to gain further insight, we extend the model to a fully continuous time setting which provides us with a complete generative model, including expressions for the generating and characteristic functions. Furthermore, each part of our model has a direct physical interpretation of the underlying disease propagation mechanism. The model balances fidelity and parsimony so that the model can 1) be calibrated to data relatively easily, 2) provide semi-analytic tractability that allows for trade-off analysis between different mitigation strategies 3) generate realistic simulated sample paths for comparing interventions.

The model

In this paper, we build a Crump-Mode-Jagers (CMJ) branching process model through a subordinated Lévy process. CMJ constructions contain the triple of random processes (λ x , ξ x (·), χ x (·)) loosely defined as,• λ x is a random variable that denotes an infected person's communicable period;• ξ(t) = #{k : σ(ω, k) ≤ t} counts the number of infected people over event space Ω(ω) in time t. ξ x (t − σ x ) denotes the random number of infected people created by an infected person at every moment of her communicable period over the} is the number of infectious existing at moment t).Our model generates infections from an infected individual through a compound Poisson process where the event times represent transmission events (σ x ). We imagine that an individual is infectious from the moment she becomes infected. The number of new infections at each transmission event is a draw from the logarithmic distribution [12] (ξ(t)) and consequently, the resulting generative process is the negative binomial process (see, for example, Quenouille [13] ). The stochastic counting processes remains "on" during the communicable period and then shuts "off" at the end-that is, the communicable period is the random lifetime (λ x ) in the CMJ language. We model the communicable period as a gamma distributed random variable, Γ(a, b), with mean t = a/b. By subordinating our resulting negative binomial process with a gamma process for the communicable period, we arrive at our model of Covid-19 propagationa gamma negative binomial branching process (GNBBP). (For details on subordinated Lévy processes, see [14] .)

Construction details

We model the propagation of Covid-19 by assuming that people become infectious immediately after contracting the virus and that they can infect others throughout the duration of their communicable period. We assume the population is homogeneous and that each new infected individual has the same statistical properties as previously infected people. Specifically, we assume that an infected person infects Q(t) other people during time interval [0, t] according to a compound Poisson process,where the number of infectious events, N (t), follow a Poisson counting process with arrival rate λ, and Y i , the number infected at each event, follows the logarithmic distribution,The characteristic function for Q(t) reads,with λ = −r ln(1 − p) and thus Q(t) follows a negative binomial process,In this process, during a communicable period, t, an infected individual infects Q(t) people based on a draw from the negative binomial with mean rtp/(1 − p). The infection events occur continuously in time according to the Poisson arrivals. However, the communicable period, t, is in actuality a random variable, T , which we model as a gamma process 1 with density,which has a mean ofT = at/b. By promoting the communicable period to a random variable, the negative binomial process changes into a Lévy process with characteristic function,where η(u), the Lévy symbol, and ψ(s), the Laplace exponent, are respectively given by,E[e −sT (t) ] = exp(−t ψ(s)),and so,Z(t) is the random number of people infected by a single infected individual over her random communicable period. Without loss of generality, we absorb t into a (or alternatively set t = 1, representing a single lifetime) giving a mean communicable periodT = a/b. The gamma process smears out the end of communicable period. We see that R 0 = E[Z(1)] = arp/(b(1 − p)), and thus our process has the same mean as the negative binomial process with a fixed stopping time of t = a/b. In fact, 1 We apply a gamma process subordinator to the negative binomial process.

4

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.

(which was not certified by peer review)

The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 10, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.08.20149039 doi: medRxiv preprint since λ = −r ln(1 − p) we have the simple relationship,= Mean number of infectious events in a lifetime ×Mean number infected at each event.The variance of the our counting process is over-dispersed relative to the the negative binomial,The model has four parameters:• p sets the number of infected people per infectious interaction. The mean number of infected people per infectious event is,gives the arrival rate of infectious events.• a, b together set the mean communicable period,t = a/b, and determine the skewness and kurtosis of the gamma distribution, Γ(a, b). In the limit b → 0 with a/b finite, the gamma distribution becomes a delta function at the mean time and we recover the negative binomial process evaluated at t = a/b.The characteristic function eq.(6) of the stopped stochastic process allows us to explore the model's analytical properties, which can help decision makers better understand trade-offs in small environments.The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 10, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.08.20149039 doi: medRxiv preprint where N is the number of infections produced by an infected person during her communicable period, and q is the probability of a successful isolation event. Instead of arbitrarily cutting the communicable period's density function based on an isolation event as prescribed in [11] , our model maintains the same form of the generating function throughout by shifting the mean of the communicable period's gamma process. In a contact-trace-isolate policy, the expected number of infections per infected individual becomes,Mean number infected at event × Mean number of events.Eq.(24) provides intuition for comparing competing courses of action by affording trade-off analyses. In a lock-down, health authorities control the spread of the disease by lowering the human-to-human interaction rate λ. If λ can be made sufficiently small, R 0 will drop below unity and the outbreak will come under control. The first term in eq.(24) represents a suppression factor, which by construction is less than unity, and results from an isolation policy with success probability q. Alternatively, that same reduction in R 0 can also be achieved by a lock-down scenario if the infection event rate, λ, is reduced 2 by the same suppression factor. Thus, we see an equivalence in generating R effective from the two different mitigation strategies, each of which may come at different economic costs.To make the observation concrete, suppose λ = .20 implying an average of 0.20 infectious events per day, p = 0.5 implying an average of 1.44 infections per infectious event, and a mean communicable period of a/b = 5.5 days. The parameters imply R 0 = 1.59. Figure 1 shows iso-contours of fixed suppression factor in the a /b − q plane. We can now see the trade-off between a lock-down policy with a fixed suppression factor and a contact tracing with isolation policy which generates the suppression factor from successful contact tracing events. For a fixed suppression factor figure 1 shows the equivalent curve in the a /b − q plane. The economic costs of generating the same value the suppression factor among the two strategies (lock-down vs contact tracing with isolation), with its corresponding reduction in the effective R 0 , will in general not be the same. From the figure we see in this example that a contact tracing with 2 We recognize that a lock-down would probably reduce p in the logarithmic distribution as well, but we suspect that effect is secondary. We suspect that p, which sets the number of people infected during an event, is not nearly as sensitive to a lock-down scenario as compared to the expected number of events during the communicable period.The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 10, 2020. . isolation policy with an isolation probability of 0.75 and a mean isolation time of 4 days is equivalent to reducing the rate of human-to-human infection events by a factor of approximately 1.25. A lock-down that reduces human interactions by a factor of 1.25 will almost certainly cost much more than the corresponding contact tracing with isolation strategy [9] . The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 10, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.08.20149039 doi: medRxiv preprint which has the solution,(28)Thus the asymptotic behaviour of the solution is governed by the pair parameters α, and β.Recall that ξ(t) = #{k : σ(ω, k) ≤ t} counts the number of infections during the observation window [0, t] over event space Ω(ω). In our model we have,where λ and µ are respectively the Poisson arrival rate and the mean of logarithmic distribution, and where,which leads to the expected result for the mean of direct infections per individual,Using eq.(31) and eq.(26) we find that,which we can solve for the Malthusian parameter, α, by Newton-Raphson. If R 0 < 1 the branching process will not experience asymptotic exponential growth, instead we can solve eq.(25) for its long term limit,The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 10, 2020. . with the number of infected by time t composed of infections at time σ i ,The probability of extinction reads,and for our model, we arrive at the transcendental relationship,Again, we can apply Newton-Raphson and solve for the extinction probability Q.In addition to the extinction probability for our branching process, we can estimate the average number of total infected people at extinction if extinction occurs by considering the theory random graphs. The branching process is a directed bipartite graph (it is a tree) and given the generating function for the process, we know the distribution of the outgoing edges from a randomly chosen vertex. In [15] , the authors extend Erdos-Renyi constructions of random graphs to graphs with arbitrary vertex degree. They compute the mean component size for graphs, including graphs excluding the giant component, if it exists.The total number infected corresponds to the random characteristic E(χ(t)) = 1 and thus eq.(35) has the non-Malthusian growth solution,In [15] , the authors consider two generating functions,• G 0 (s): the generating function for the probability distribution of the vertex's degree; and• G 1 (s) = G 0 (s)/G 0 (1): the generating function for the probability distribution of the outgoing edges from a randomly chosen vertex.Eq.(6) with e iu → s is G 1 (s) in the notation of [15] and for our purposes we do not need an explicit formula for G 0 (s). The average component size of the graph, in the absence of a giant component, is [15] x = 1 +which matches the renewal equation solution eq.(41) if G 0 (1) = G 1 (1)-that is, the generating two functions intersect tangentially at s = 1.The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 10, 2020. . At G 1 (1) = 1 a phase transition occurs and the giant component emerges. The fraction of the graph occupied by the giant component is,where Q is the extinction probability for the distribution of outgoing edges, Q = G 1 (Q).Since the fraction of the graph that does not belong to the giant component is composed precisely of those graphs which have gone extinct in our process, we impose G 0 (Q) = Q. Thus, we demand that the two generating functions intersect on the 45 • line at Q < 1 when α > 0. The average component size in this case becomes [15] ,where,As Q → 1 we see that G 1 (Q) and G 0 (Q) increasingly intersect tangentially, finally becoming tangent at Q = 1, which is consistent with our observation in eq.(42). We takex to be the average size of the total infected population at extinction, if extinction occurs.The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 10, 2020. . Imagine a scenario in which a decision maker has an office space with 100 employees and she must decide on mitigation strategies. Suppose a baseline scenario with λ = 0.2 and p = 0.5 (corresponding to an average of 1.44 infected per event). Given the properties of the communicable period, this scenario corresponds to R 0 = 1.59, which implies that if an infected person arrives in the population, in expectation, the branching process will lead to exponential growth in infections. In figures 3a and 3b we display the solution to the renewal equation with this parameter choice for the expected number of infected people and the expected size of the active infectious population respectively.Let us suppose that the decision maker can change the model parameters λ and p through policy considerations, creating two possible alternative scenarios, each coming at different financial costs. Our model allows the decision maker to investigate tradeoffs between starting from one undetected infected individual in the workplace. We summarize model outputs between two scenarios in table 1.In some office environments, we can imagine a scenario in which management introduces an aggressive testing scheme to isolate infected employees. Suppose our manager faces the baseline scenario on 1 but instead of manipulating interaction rate or meeting sizes, the manager implements a test with a 90% chance of a successful isolation and sharply peaked at a mean of three days. In figure 4 we display the density of the communicable period in the presence of a successful isolation event. Using eq.(24) we see that R effective = 0.59 × 1.59 = 0.93, and thus this isolation strategy turns an exponentially growing configuration into a process that will go extinct almost surely.The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 10, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 10, 2020. Unfortunately, under real world conditions, we are rarely fortunate enough to have complete and pristine data. We may fail to identify linkages between observed cases, fail to assign infections to the correct ancestor, or fail to observe some infections entirely (e.g., asymptomatic cases, or people who do not interact with the public health system). As such, we do not see ground truth, but rather an imprecise reflection of it. To account for these effects, our GNBBP requires augmentation with a comparably simple, parsimonious model of the measurement/observation process. Such an observation layer model will depend on the specifics of the data.The observed early stage growth of case numbers can provide a complementary means of constraining model parameters based upon the predicted dynamics of a branching process based upon the underlying GNBBP. While this signal is again imperfect-we do not observe all infected individuals, merely those testing positive-the observed growth rate in cumulative cases should be comparable to the cumulative number of people infected, provided that the testing protocol and capacity remain constant over the window of observation. Note, however, that this approach does not allow for a full resolution of all four parameters, (p, r, a, b), but rather provides a constraint on a specific combination of them.The underlying propagation mechanism of the GNBBP affords additional interpretability to the model, which, in turn, facilitates incorporation of other prior information. For example, knowing that it is unlikely that multiple thousands of individuals could be infected in a single interaction allows us to set a prior with more mass on values of p closer to 0; moreover, direct experimental measurement of this parameter might be possible in a lab setting or augmented by fine grained clinical data. Similar considerations apply to the rate of infectious events, λ. The parameters which govern the communicable period, (a, b), can be inferred from clinical observations. Likewise,

Contact tracing and propagation interruption

The process in eq.(6) represents the spread of the disease from an infected individual without any mitigation strategies. Imagine that we can trace, contact, and isolate infected individuals with a success probability q and with an mean time to isolation ofm <t = a/b after the infectious event. We assume that once isolated, there is no chance for the infected individual to spread the disease any further. We again imagine that the isolation time is gamma distributed but with parameters (a , b ) leading to the isolation process, Z (1),Notice that the branching process for a successful isolation event has the same form as the original process with a mean time of the random communicable period ofm = a /b . Thus, the trace-contact-isolate branching process becomes,5 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.

6

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.

Renewal equations and Malthusian parameters

Given a random characteristic χ(t), such as the number of infectious individuals at time t, (e.g.,where λ x is the random communicable period) the expectation of the process follows,Defining the Malthusian parameter, α > 0, if it exists, by,we can change eq.(25) into a renewal equation,7 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.

Extinction probabilities and component sizes

In the CMJ framework, we have the generating function,8 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.

9

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.

A scenario planing exercise: Policy input for return to work

One area of apllication for our model is helping decision makers understand counterfactual outcomes in a return-to-work policy exercises. In setting policies, decision makers must weigh the operational needs of their business while against the possibility of an outbreak in the work environment. In addition to the analytical results that our model provides, simulation can further help ring-fence difficult decisions. Our model requires four parameters, the arrival rate of infectious interactions, the average number infected at each event, and two parameters which govern the communicable period's density function. We use the open literature [16] as a guide to fix the communicable period; we fix a = 4.4 days with b = 0.84; these parameter choices give a mean communicable period of 5.5 days with 97.5% of the communicable period ending in 11.5 days. In figure 2 , we show the density function arising from our parameter settings. The decision maker has control over the remaining two parameters. By limiting meeting sizes, restricting the number of employees interactions, and by mandating the use of personal protective equipment, the decision maker can set the variables controlling the arrival rate of infectious events and the number infected at each event. We treat the population as homogeneous, holding fixed the arrival rate for infections and the number infected per event over time. In a small setting, in reality, we expect that as people become infected the social network will change, even in the limit of an unmitigated outbreak. Those changes which will have an effect on the basic parameters of our branching model as the population becomes infected, but exactly how the network changes is a complicated phenomena. Feedback can move the arrival rate and the number infected at each event in competing directions. By ignoring any 10 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.

11

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.

A note on parameter inference

This paper describes a gamma negative binomial branching process (GNBBP) on the number of new infections generated by an infected individual. Given a set of observed {n k } K k=1 infection counts for K individuals, a complete Bayesian analysis of the model is possible, using, for example, the infrastructure provided in [17] . Under this scheme, all four parameters (r, p, a, b) can be resolved, allowing for full posterior predictive analysis.

12

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.

13

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 10, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.08.20149039 doi: medRxiv preprint information on probable ranges of R 0 from other comparable infections could also be leveraged to provide a joint constraint on r, p, a, and b.

Discussion

In small setting with localized outbreaks, a branching model offers a stochastic view of the propagation. To be useful in a decision making setting, the branching model must be parsimonious yet contain appropriate features which match clinical observations and bounds on key parameter such as R 0 . Our model contains physically motivated mechanisms that link to macroscopic observables. For instance, our model generates the negative binomial count process by coupling Poisson infectious event arrivals with the logarithmic for the number infected at each event. We extend the model of [11] by including the serial interval distribution within a complete generative continuous time stochastic branching process. Furthermore, our model allows for an exploration of trade-offs between mitigation strategies at the microscopic level, especially in light of the model's analytical tractability. Because our model includes the generating function of the underlying branching process, it easy to build a continuous time simulation engine and directly model the effect of intervention 14 . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license It is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 10, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.08.20149039 doi: medRxiv preprint strategies.

