Introduction

Vaccination substantially reduces COVID19-related symptomatic infection, severe disease, hospitalization, and death in both clinical trial 1-3 and real-world settings. 4, 5 Less is known about the effect of vaccination on asymptomatic infection. Early reports from observational studies suggest reduced rates of asymptomatic infection among vaccinated individuals, 6, 7 but studies so far have provided no information on virologic characteristics of breakthrough infections. As asymptomatic infections have been important drivers of SARS-CoV-2 transmission prior to vaccination, 8,9 improved understanding of post-vaccination asymptomatic infections, including viral load and duration of shedding, is a public health priority.

Study design

We conducted a prospective cohort study of healthcare workers before, during and after COVID-19 vaccination in a large healthcare system (Mass General Brigham, MGB) in Boston, Massachusetts from December 30, 2020 through April 2, 2021. Employees were eligible for participation if they were eligible for vaccination through MGB's vaccination program, were planning to or had recently received the first dose of a COVID-19 vaccine through MGB and were able to drop off weekly selfswab testing kits. We recruited healthcare workers through email announcements and posted advertisements in English and Spanish.

Study procedures and data collection

Participants completed weekly self-administered anterior nasal swabs and online symptom surveys.Participants who developed symptoms suggestive of COVID-19 accessed additional testing through Occupational Health protocols. Weekly testing continued from study enrollment through eight weeks after the first vaccine dose; if a participant enrolled more than 4 weeks after the first vaccine dose, testing continued for 4 weeks. Those who tested positive underwent independent symptom A c c e p t e d M a n u s c r i p t 4 evaluation through Occupational Health. Nasal swabs underwent real-time reverse transcriptase PCR testing at the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard (Cambridge, Massachusetts), with cycle thresholds reported for positive tests (three cycles is about one log difference in viral load). 10 Testing through Occupational Health was completed at either the Broad Institute or a CLIA-approved, hospitalaffiliated laboratory. Study investigators had access to all participants' SARS-CoV-2 test results in the MGB system and Occupational Health symptom assessments during the study period.

Virologic characteristics sub-study

On January 29, 2021, we initiated a sub-study to elucidate virologic characteristics of postvaccination infection. For study participants who tested positive after their first vaccine dose, we conducted home visits approximately every other day for up to 14 days to collect self-administered nasal swabs for SARS-CoV-2 PCR testing, viral culture, and sequencing (see Supplementary Material).

Statistical Analysis

Our primary outcome was infection incidence rates in the pre-vaccination, partially vaccinated, and fully vaccinated intervals. Our primary exposure was vaccination period, classified based on time since the first and second vaccine doses, as pre-vaccination, partially vaccinated, and fully vaccinated intervals. For the two-dose mRNA vaccine regimens, we defined the pre-vaccination period as observation time up to 5 days after the first vaccine dose; the partially vaccinated period as 6 days after the first vaccine dose through 13 days after the second vaccine dose; and the fully vaccinated period as 14 days after the second vaccine dose until the end of the follow-up interval. We completed sensitivity analyses varying the delineation between the pre and partial vaccination periods. and R (www.r-project.org). The study was approved by the MGB Human Subjects Review Committee.

Results

In total, 2,247 healthcare workers were included in the analytic cohort (eTable 1 & 2). More women enrolled (n=1,760; 78%); median age was 37 years (IQR 30, 50); the most common healthcare role was physician/nurse practitioner/physician assistant (n=873; 39%), and 84% (n=1,879) identified as White or Caucasian. Nearly half (n=1,015; 47%) cared for COVID-19 patients during the study, and nearly all participants (n=2,243; >99%) were fully vaccinated by the end of the study period. The A c c e p t e d M a n u s c r i p t 6 (31.6%) occurred in the pre-vaccination period (median 1.5 days after dose 1), 10 (52.6%) occurred during the partial vaccination period (median 21.5 days after dose 1), and 3 (15.8%) occurred after full vaccination (median 52 days after dose 1). Incidence was lower among those who were fully vaccinated (34.6 per 1000 person-years (95% CI 7.1-101.1); rate ratio 0.052 (95% CI 0.013-0.21); p<0.001) and those who were partially vaccinated (72.8 per 1000 person-years (95% CI 34.9-133.9); rate ratio 0.11 (95% CI 0.040-0.30); p<0.001), compared to those who were unvaccinated (666.3 per 

Discussion

By coordinating a systematic testing infrastructure amid a large health system's rapid COVID-19 vaccination rollout, we found that SARS-CoV-2 infection incidence decreased in a stepwise fashion following vaccination. We did identify asymptomatic infections in the partial and fully vaccinated periods; however, all asymptomatic individuals who underwent serial retesting had negative repeat PCR tests within two days and none had culturable live virus. This suggests a shorter duration of viral shedding in these asymptomatic individuals than has been previously reported for pre-vaccination symptomatic infections. 11 Strengths of this study are the prospective design, systematic weekly sampling regardless of symptoms, and in-depth virologic characterization among a subset of participants who tested positive. This study also has limitations. First, participants completed nasal swabs weekly, which may have been longer than the interval in which an asymptomatic participant could be infected and have stopped shedding, thereby underestimating asymptomatic infection incidence. Second, we were unable to enroll an unvaccinated control group in the healthcare setting, limiting our ability to definitively separate incidence trends in our study from regional trends during the study period.However, the incidence rate in our study cohort continued to decline while local test positivity began to increase (eFigure 1), suggesting that incidence rates in our cohort are not simply a mirror of community trends. Lastly, our cohort is comprised of healthcare workers that are predominantly A c c e p t e d M a n u s c r i p t 8 young, female, and of Caucasian/non-Hispanic race and ethnicity, and may not reflect the general population, including older adults and those who are immunosuppressed.

Conclusion

COVID-19 incidence decreased from pre-to post-vaccination. Although positive tests were observed in asymptomatic individuals following vaccination, higher cycle thresholds, subsequent negative repeat PCR testing, and inability to culture the virus in those cases calls into question the clinical significance of these asymptomatic infections.A c c e p t e d M a n u s c r i p t 9 NOTES:

