

not only in the scope of actions by the national taskforce and oversight within administrative J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f 1 particular, there is a capacity gap (in financial capacity, human resources, access to 2 information, and others between jurisdictions) among local governments that hinder 3 collaboration across governmental agencies [14, 15] . For instance, DKI Jakarta is well-4 endowed with resources to implement policies relative to the urban agglomeration, and though 5 there is interconnectivity of movement, jurisdictional boundaries reshape service delivery.

6

This paper focuses on explaining the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic from March 7 to mid-October 2020 between the seven major urban agglomerations of Indonesia. We provide 8 a spatial representation of these dynamics through a series of maps and temporal graphs to 9 show the spread of the disease. We thereafter collate various policy responses in each of the 10 jurisdictions of urban agglomerations as a basis for explaining the transmission as well as the 11 impacts of policies that have been sought to stem its expansion. Overall, we are concerned 12 with the convergence of data on the spread of disease amid a pandemic, its relationship to 13 policies addressing continued infections, and the overall disaster management context in 14 which it has taken place. Section two presents our overall methods. Section three highlights 15 key aspects of our findings around the rise of confirmed cases and deaths between March 16 and mid-October 2020 juxtaposed with the implemention of certain non-pharmaceutical 17 interventions (i.e., distancing policies and mobility restrictions). This analysis is backed by 18 spatial representations of findings across the seven major urban agglomerations in Indonesia.

19

The discussion points to issues with data credibility and collection, and though these were 20 triangulated by available media accounts, conclusions imply the importance of better overall 21 planning and coordination that reinforce data-informed decision making and communication Table 1 ). Demographic and spatial data were also 39 fundamental for this research as we used data on density, case distribution, and spatial As for demographic and spatial data, we analyzed density, case distribution, and 5 spatial clusters to the extent possible to highlight the trends of COVID-19 cases in the study 6 areas. We use the 2019 latest secondary data from the Central Bureau of Statistics. As the 7 island with the highest density in Indonesia, urban agglomerations located in Java (i.e.,

8

Greater Jakarta, Bandung, Semarang, and Surabaya) have a significantly higher population 9 than the urban agglomerations outside Java (Greater Bali, Medan, and Makassar) . By comparing the population and total area, it is generally recognized that the population density 11 in the Java urban agglomerations is higher compared to those outside Java. As the national 12 capital, Greater Jakarta produced much more confirmed cases (up to 311,000 until mid-Some hospitals in the city function as the referral hospital to serve the neighboring districts. It 9 is therefore likely that the death cases of these two cities are not only a reflection of the 10 inhabitants of the core cities. Although this study was limited to the early period of the pandemic one could easily imagine 9 applying a spatial monitoring system that tracks the effectiveness of particular policies.

13

October) compared to the other agglomerations.14 15 16 surveillance and testing in the order of one person tested per 1,000 people per week. This 7 minimum case detection benchmark was achieved in DKI Jakarta, West Sumatera, East 8 Kalimantan, and West Papua for the previous three weeks, but none of these provinces had 9 a positivity rate of less than 5%. The testing ratio data among provinces (see Annex 1. A.3) 10 showed a significant gap between Greater Jakarta and the rest of the agglomerations (see Fig   11   2 ). While Greater Jakarta could test more than 5000 people for every million in population,The education cluster correlated to SfH where some areas loosened restrictions by 14 allowing activities to take place in the school field. SfH has been implemented most 

12

other agglomerations could only do it to about 300 people at maximum. Greater Bandung 13 could not even test 100 people at the same ratio despite having the second largest population 14 among the seven agglomerations. These testing realities indicate the generally low capacity 15 of the agglomerations other than Greater Jakarta (regarded as an outlier) at conducting their 3. Findings 1When it came to religious activities, it was difficult to control people's participation, especially 13 in a mass event. A lot of large religious events drew people from the outside of the host areas, 

2

Along with the release of Presidential Decree 9/2020 about the Task Force for Rapid   3   Response to COVID-19 on March 13, data on COVID-19 cases and fatalities have been   4 reported to the public. The data provided the basis for developing Figure 2 There would be two explanations for this. The first is that the death cases may be 3 higher in the smaller cities surrounding the other urban agglomerations as the surrounding 4 cities provide limited health care compared to larger cities (e.g. Jakarta). Another possibility is 5 that death cases are based on reports from hospitals. As the capital city of Central Java and 6 East Java provinces, Semarang and Surabaya need to provide health-care for the entire 7 province, which means that the deaths recorded there is a reflection of the broader region.During the pandemic, we traced all decrees of each selected province, city, and district.Trends on geographic similarity and differentiation were identified in each 3 agglomeration. These were presented in various data formats that allowed for ease of 4 analysis, combining Table 3 with Fig. 5-11 , as well as data compiled in Annex 2. Table 4 5 summarizes the policy measures and application in the selected agglomerations. Presenting 6 variables and modes of an analysis in a dynamic context unfolding under rapid changes of the 7 pandemic affords new methodological entry points of analysis on urban agglomerations.

16

Semarang and Bandung remain at lower rates of confirmed transmission than other peri-urban 17 areas but are higher relative to their surrounding peri-urban areas. In general, peri-urban areas 18 have a lower proportion than the main cities. This finding is explained by the higher density of 19 the main cities relative to their peri-urban areas. Nevertheless, these figures could also be a 20 factor of the availability of testing facilities in the main cities. In addition, many commuters 21 living in peri-urban areas (particularly Depok) were tested as part of office regiments at their 22 workplaces in Jakarta, in which the transmission figures were recorded in Jakarta. The mayor

23

of Depok also suggested that up to 70% of confirmed cases in Depok in August were actually 24 imported cases from people working in the Jakarta area [17] . Despite the steady growth of all 25 cities and surrounding peri-urban areas, confirmed cases have considerably increased in 26 Jakarta since mid-June. The growth rate was even higher after the second week of August:Workplace clusters (office, factory, and office/factory) dominated both incidents in the 24 main city and those in peri-urban areas within the agglomeration. Workplace clusters 25 correlated to WfO measures, which was gradually eased since the "new normal" in August.As the largest agglomeration and national center of economic activities, it was unsurprising 24 that Greater Jakarta had the highest testing capacity and thus the highest incidence of 25 emerging clusters. Dependence on maintaining national economic performance meant that 26 the region is under a lot of pressure to ease restrictions. Accordingly, exponential increases 27 occurred after the easing of PSBB restrictions, which was shifted to a partial restriction (PSBB 28 Transisi). Another factor is the mass homecoming (mudik) during the Eid holiday in June, 29 which undermined PSBB containment measures. Mudik conducted by people from Jakarta to 30 other areas was another reason for transmission to smaller cities and peri-urban areas as the 31 cities served as epicenters at the earlier stages of the pandemic. Travel permits had limited 32 efficacy in keeping people from traveling outside the affected cities/districts.In this light, budget limitations present a major concern. This has resulted in uneven restrictions were adopted specifically due to a lack of budgets.

27

About 740 cases were confirmed in mid-March, which significantly grew to 92,780 cases by 28 mid-October.

29

For COVID-19 related death rates, Semarang and Surabaya outpaced all other 30 jurisdictions (see Figure 4) . Surabaya was the first to experience a significant rise in the 31 number of deaths as numbers began to increase rapidly in the second week of May. However,

32

Semarang exceeded Surabaya in the death rate beginning in August. In Semarang, the 33 number of deaths in April amounted to 30 people and increased to 860 deaths by mid-October.

34

Although Jakarta's total number of confirmed cases and deaths is far higher than the other 35 J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f main cities and peri-urban areas (see Annex 1), the proportion of the casualties in Semarang 1 and Surabaya is significantly higher than in Jakarta.

25

Even though the peri-urban cases are lower in severity than the main city, the close connection 26 between the two generates more potential spread of cases in both types of areas. Higher 27 densities in the main city may also result in additional confirmed cases and deaths.

30

In this section, we review all policy measures/restrictions introduced to curb the spread 31 of the COVID-19 pandemic beyond the application of basic health protocols of mandatory These measures are then mapped against each jurisdiction and the timing that each measure 1 was instituted to identify the impacts of each policy measure 1 .

3

The governments imposed six overall types of restrictions/measures, including (1) schooling,

4

(2) workplace, (3) religious activities, (4) activities at public facilities, (5) socio-cultural 5 activities, and (6) 14 15 Limitations on workplace activities: At the low level, up to 25% of workers allowed to work at office settings, with proportion increases to 25-50% at the moderate level, and 75% at the severe level.Applied to all types of employment with more flexible treatment possible for 11 strategic sectors: health; food/beverage; energy; communication and information technologies; finance; logistics; hospitality; construction; strategic industries; basic services, public utilities, and industries designated as vital national objects; others for the essential fulfillment of daily needs.Limitation on the Use of Public Places and FacilitiesThe restriction was carried out by prohibiting activities in public facilities by a group of more than five people. Some activities in public places and facilities were still allowed, especially in relation to daily needs such as traditional markets, supermarkets, public health facilities, and service providers like banks.

Limitations on Religious Activities

Limitations on crowding at places of worship, except for the call to prayer, the ringing of bells, and the like. Required to practice religious activities in homes instead of attending community gatherings.

Limitation on Social and Cultural Activities

Prohibition of socio-cultural activities except for funeral ceremonies for deaths not caused by COVID-19, circumcision events, and weddings that observe health protocols. Socio-cultural activities completely stopped included political, sports, entertainment, academic, and cultural activities.

Mobility Control and Travel Restriction

Applied to all agglomerations with different degrees of limitations between the cities/districts that implement PSBB. The same restrictions applied to all agglomerations included the limiting of passengers to a maximum of 50% of vehicle capacity and distancing between passengers to a minimum of 1 meter in public transit.

18

1 Given that this covers many jurisdictions, the summary data are presented in Annex 2.J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f

1

The data on clusters highlight extensive transmission at the same place and time. The 2 data also shows that these clusters emerged because of violations against control measures 3 on distancing restrictions. Reports point to the lack of distancing between people despite 4 control measures instituted by government agencies at cluster sites. The clusters in Table 3 5 were selected from those that generated a minimum of 20 cases in Java and a minimum of 6 10 cases from outside of Java. There were 11 types of clusters identified: office, factory, 7 office/factory, religious activities, residential complex/dormitory, public facility, market/trading 8 center, family, health facility, education, and restaurant. Table 3 shows the 11 types of emerging clusters, which indicate correlation to a 2 specific type of control measure, especially measure 1-5. The correlations are indicated from 3 the emerging cluster types that are derived from the failure of a particular control measure that 4 should be applied. Policy changes, such as those related to returning to work, school 5 openings, and holidays under the "new normal" policy in Indonesia (i.e., easing of PSBB) 6 resulted in more cases of COVID-19 in various types of clusters. The first most typical cluster 7 occurred because of workers returning to office work. The data on clusters also confirms 8 perceptions of stronger transmission rates during holidays due to social/religious gatherings.

9

In these conditions, people let their guard down on distancing measures, especially when the 10 gatherings involve large groups of people. The "new normal" policy also resulted in the re-11 opening of dine-in restaurants and cafes. More detailed correlations between cluster type and 12 type of control measure are explained as follows.J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f Effective measure, no emerging cluster.Measure for health facility was harder to maintain with the rapid rise of cases. Most emerging clusters from health facility happened in bigger or main cities because it also serves the surrounding areas.Social activity measure within family were rarely applied especially those who live in the same house, resulting in family member infected the rest of the family from workplace clusters case. 'New Normal' made it easier to hold social gatherings (wedding, funeral, etc) , resulting in the emerging family clusters. Effective measure, no emerging cluster.

26

The immediate impacts of this easing resulted in the surge of workplace clusters and 27 confirmed cases, especially in Greater Jakarta. The WfO generally operated as a suggestion 28 and was never compulsory for each office [20] . This also related to the government stance 29 that halting people from working would affect the national economy [21] . WfH was also mainly 30 J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f applied to "white collar" industries and were deemed difficult to apply for people working in 1 informal sectors. Many lost their livelihoods because of the first PSBB as economic activities 2 slowed or halted [21] . By the end of September, however, Greater Jakarta was back to 3 applying full PSBB, and required tightening of WfH. The number of cases in Greater 4 Semarang also surged after the outbreak of three workplace clusters that recorded more than 5 160 cases [22] . Other agglomerations with workplace clusters dominated the case outbreaks, 6 including those in Greater Makassar dan Greater Denpasar.

7

Religious activities clusters showed that limitations did not exert a maximum effect in 8 many agglomerations as the regional government eased the limitation by giving the authority 9 back to local religious figures especially after the Eid holiday. After the easing was carried out, 10 the restriction on religious activities in places of worship changed from "no visitor allowed" to 11 "limit the proportion of visitors" to as much as 50-75% of the total capacity of places of worship.

39

While there were direct correlations between the emerging clusters and type of 40 measures discussed above, mobility control and travel restriction measures did not show 41 specific correlation to a certain type of cluster. Rather, this measure correlated to all types of 42 clusters as all activities influence mobility and travel. This measure is applied to all 43 agglomerations even though different degrees of limitations were in place between the 44 cities/districts that implemented PSBB. The same restrictions applied to all agglomerations 45 included the limiting of passengers to a maximum of 50% of vehicle capacity and distancing 46 between passengers to a minimum of 1 meter in public transit. However, this measure was counter-productive especially in urban areas where people were still required to work in the office. The decreasing services also drew a backlog of people waiting in the public transport 1 stops and made it harder to practice social distancing [26] . As an alternative, the government 2 encouraged people to ride bicycles to work in some areas, but without enforcing the 3 importance of wearing a mask. This resulted in biking becoming an increasingly popular 4 recreational activity in groups and generated pockets of virus transmission [27] .The core cities of an urban agglomeration continue to yield larger nominal case values 40 compared to their peri-urban neighbours, but there are variations between geographic 41 contexts. This implies that the enforcement of mobility restriction policies has delivered 42 successful outcomes, but we have also showed the timing and capability for applying policies 43 also has a significant impact. Likewise, the ways that centralized authority and decentralization The relaxation of WfH heavily affected the concentration of industrial areas with its workers commuting across areas within the agglomeration.Social activity measure within family were rarely applied especially those who live in the same house, resulting in family member infected the rest of the family from workplace clusters case.

5

When the restriction scheme was relaxed, several regions (Denpasar, Badung, Gowa, 6 Greater Semarang, Greater Jakarta-except DKI Jakarta and South Tangerang) began to 7 allow mobility of residents and goods without capacity limitations, provided that health 8 protocols remained in place. Differences in the application of this measure is concerned with 9 the limitation of the cross city/district mobility, which was usually applied only to, and by 10 cities/districts implementing PSBB. An example of limitation on cross-boundary mobility could 11 be found in Greater Jakarta, where DKI Jakarta required people from inside and outside of the The results show similarities between urban agglomerations as well as geographic 6 differentiation. There were particular incidents that led to outbreaks in specific contexts and 7 common differences between urban cores relative to their peri-urban areas. We have also 8 shown how specific effects of policies unfolded in different regions, especially the temporal 9 relationships with the application, easing, or implementation of certain policies. Broadly, the struggle to control mobility was mostly due to economic reasons, and significant outbreaks 11 were identified through office/factory clusters. The fact that most people work at the city center while living in neighboring districts has led to the complexity of applying particular measures 1 in the context of national policy directives and decentralized governing authority.

33

There were great variations in how the control measures were employed in DKI Jakarta 34 and its peri-urban areas. Some Greater Jakarta peri-urban areas employed double measures 35 as it not only followed their regional government measures but also had to adjust to the Jakarta 36 control measures. After the first PSBB ended, peri-urban areas like Depok and Bogor 37 established their own measures. In general, cases from peri-urban areas of Greater Jakarta 38 contributed up to 30% of confirmed cases that occurred in the main city. Meanwhile, up to 39 70% of cases in Depok were imported from people working in the Jakarta area. These cases 40 then led to transmission in less populated cores, resulting in the spike of cases from family 41 cluster [17] . A majority of the imported cases from DKI Jakarta caused confusion for local 42 governments regarding how to control resident mobility or to impose regional measures due 43 to commuter volumes. Jakarta announced on September 9 th that it would reimpose large-scale 44 social restrictions effective from September 14 amid a rising number of cases reported from 45 the capital [28] . The restrictions were less stringent than the first lockdown in April and allowed 46 for some non-essential workplaces to operate if they met specific conditions. However,

47

Tangerang and South Tangerang city consistently performed stricter regulations to minimize 1 the imported cases. 

10

At the time of analysis, several key findings are of note across the case studies. 

37

Another critical issue related to centralized authority versus decentralized mandate is 38 that mobility patterns cross jurisdictions, which make it difficult to control movement between 39 a jurisdiction's borders. Since mobility occurs in a temporary or seasonal basis, there is no 40 reference data that could be used to identify movements [36] . Hamidi et al. [5] argued that 41 mobility between metropolitan areas significantly influences the increase of COVID-19 cases.

42

Cases in the core cities, such as Jakarta and Surabaya, were dominated by transmission Indeed, the COVID-19 pandemic serves as a valuable lesson to critique aspects of 3 decentralization in regards to urban agglomerations and development. Urban agglomerations 4 in the global south still facing governance challenges of regional disparity, specifically a 5 significant capacity gap between the core region and its surrounding districts [37, 38, 39] . Most 6 urban centers in Asia, including Indonesia, have grown beyond its administrative boundaries, 7 expanding without corresponding public services in peri-urban areas [40, 41, 15] 

Greater Bandung

SfH was not practiced by boarding school resulting in the emerging of the biggest education cluster despite the application of health protocol.Hard to control number of visitor and minimum-distancing requirement in traditional market settings, hence the emerging clusters.Measure were violated mostly by restaurants/cafes.Social activity measure within family were rarely applied especially those who live in the same house, resulting in family member infected the rest of the family from workplace clusters case.'New Normal' made it easier to hold social gatherings (wedding, funeral, etc), resulting in the emerging family clusters.Main City Bandung a a a a 

Greater Medan

Effective except for few cases from boarding school where SfH was not practiced eventhough still maintaining health protocol.

Greater Makassar

Large gathering during religious mass event did not heed the control measure.Most effective measure, no emerging cluster.Large gathering during religious mass event did not heed the control measure.

Greater Bali

Large gathering during religious ceremonies did not heed the control measure.Most effective measure, no emerging cluster.Effective measure, no emerging cluster. Measure for health facility was harder to maintain with the rapid rise of cases. Most emerging clusters from health facility happened in bigger or main cities because it also serves the surrounding areas.Large gathering because of Hajj activity made it hard to impose the control measure.Most effective measure, no emerging cluster.Large gathering during religious ceremonies did not heed the control measure. Note:1. School from Home (SfH); 2. Work from Home (WfH); 3. Limitation on Religious Activities; 4. Limitation on the Use of Public Places and Facilities; 5. Limitation on Socio-Cultural Activities; and 6. Mobility Control and Travel Restriction Bangkalan DistrictSalatiga

Greater Semarang

Effective except for few cases from boarding school where SfH was not practiced eventhough still maintaining health protocol.

Policy Measure

Greater JakartaMost effective measure, no emerging cluster.Moderate control on Eid holidays and after 'New Normal' generated religious activities clusters.Hard to control number of visitor and minimum-distancing requirement in traditional market settings, hence the emerging clusters.The control was strict in general, especially the use of public transport for commuters was relatively higher compared to other agglomerations. However, there was more difficulty in controling people's mobility done by private vehicles. 

55

(2020). https://regional.kompas.com/read/2020/09/11/22434081/hasil-tracing-klaster-rumah-56 makan-di-semarang-20-orang-terpapar-covid-19.

57

[59] F. Wahyu, Lonjakan Mengerikan Covid-19 dari Klaster 3 Perusahaan di Semarang, (2020).

58

https://www.liputan6.com/regional/read/4301242/lonjakan-mengerikan-covid-19-dari-klaster-3- 

