Introduction

Appendicitis is the most common surgical issue in the pediatric population. It presents in 19 to 28 per 10,000 children younger than the age of 14 [1] and is diagnosed in 1 in 8 children evaluated urgently for abdominal pain [2] . The classic findings of periumbilical pain migrating to the abdominal right lower quadrant (RLQ), anorexia, nausea, and signs of localized or generalized peritonitis are less common in school age children than in adults. In school age children from the age of 5 to 12, the most prevalent finding is RLQ tenderness (82%), followed by nausea (79%) [3] . The most common complication of acute appendicitis is perforation, and the rate of perforated appendicitis decreases with age starting as high as 83 percent in neonates [4] and decreasing to 11 to 32 percent in children aged 5 to 12 [5] . Atypical presentations of appendicitis include appendicitis occurring in inguinal [6] and femoral [7] hernias, intussusception of the appendix [8] , and appendicitis causing scrotal abscesses [9] . Rarer still is the development of a bronchoperitoneal fistula after perforated appendicitis. A PubMed search of bronchoperitoneal fistula resulted in only 6 unique case reports and only one case in 1947 that was secondary to appendicitis [10] . We therefore present this very rare patient case as it has not been described in the literature for about 75 years.

Case Description

The patient is a 9-year-old Hispanic male who presented to a local emergency room with the chief complaint of difficulty breathing. The patient and family are Spanish-speaking thus history was acquired with assistance from an interpreter. The patient had a two-day history of coughing and decreased energy. On the evening of presentation, he had an episode of emesis with coughing. He ambulated with assistance into the ER and initial vitals revealed an oxygen saturation of 70%, heart rate of 170, temperature of 101.8 F, respiratory rate in the 40s, and a normotensive blood pressure. The patient was immediately started on supplemental oxygen, received a DuoNeb treatment, IV steroids, and IV fluid bolus. A rapid COVID-19 test was performed and resulted negative. A chest x-ray and noncontrast CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis were completed which showed evidence of a subphrenic abscess that had necessitated through the diaphragm into the pleural space, and signs of perforated appendicitis (Fig. 1, Fig.   2 ). The patient's respiratory status continued to worsen, and he was emergently transferred to our tertiary care children's hospital via air transport. On arrival to our facility, the patient was critically ill, distressed, hypotensive on a continuous dopamine infusion, and oxygen saturations were as low as 8-30% despite use of supplemental oxygen and non-rebreather mask. He was intubated and started on an epinephrine drip. The chest X-ray revealed a large right pneumothorax in the subpulmonic area (Fig 1) ; thus, a right pigtail chest tube was placed with immediate purulent output and continuous air leak.Saturations slowly improved; however, the patient remained persistently hypoxic, with saturations not rising above 70%. The decision was made to undergo Venous-Venous Extra Corporeal The patient accumulated additional intraperitoneal air, and the decision was made to proceed to the operating room for diagnostic laparoscopy and definitive drainage. In the operating room, a dime sized hole in the right hemidiaphragm was noted anteriorly, close to the midclavicular line. Pulmonary parenchyma was visually identified beyond this defect and when saline was placed in this area an active air leak was identified. Due to the chronicity of this fistula, the area was drained with a 8.5 French Fuhrman pigtail tube and a 15 French Blake drain. The remainder of the abdomen was surveyed and a walled off peri-appendiceal infectious process was noted and not disturbed. With proper drainage, the patient began to slowly recover. His course was complicated by Drug Rash with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms (DRESS) syndrome, thus patient remained on high doses of steroids. He underwent tracheostomy before discharge (Fig. 6) . At his follow-up clinic appointment, two months post-hospital discharge, the patient was recovering well. The patient and his mother denied any new complaints and stated he had been regaining weight. He had completed his steroid taper and had his tracheostomy tube downsized.He did not have any shortness of breath or difficulty breathing at rest. A Chest Xray was acquired which revealed continued asymmetric elevation of the right hemidiaphragm, but overall improved expansion of both lungs since his inpatient stay. The film revealed a mild chronic interstitial prominence centrally, with no pneumothorax. The patient will require an interval appendectomy for his perforated appendix, and the plan is for continued rehabilitation and appendectomy in four to six months. [14] of which approximately one third are asymptomatic [15] . In children age 0 to 9 the most common symptom was fever (46%), followed by cough (37%) and diarrhea (15%) [16] . The full spectrum of COVID-19 presentations and complications is wide and continues to be studied. Beyond presenting symptoms, the rapid and accurate detection of COVID-19 has also been an area of urgent public health research and J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f clinical need. In this case, the patient had a negative rapid test at his initial presentation, however on repeat testing, proved positive for COVID-19.

J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f

Given the high prevalence of both appendicitis and COVID-19, there is a substantial overlap of patients who have both. A retrospective study at a single location noted a temporal relationship between a peak in COVID-19 cases in their area and increases in cases of acute appendicitis.This could possibly suggest that appendicitis is associated with a post-infectious hyperinflammatory state of COVID-19 [17] . Another retrospective review examined a total of 196 CT images during the peak of COVID-19 from March 2020 to May 2020 compared to 2019 and found that fewer patients presented for appendicitis (55 in 2020 vs 141 in 2019); however, a higher proportion of patients were found to have appendicitis (46% in 2020 vs 30% in 2019, p=0.038), and a higher proportion demonstrated severe appendicitis (92% in 2020 vs 57% in 2019, p=0.03) [18] . These findings were reproduced and reiterated by other studies which also revealed a longer symptom duration prior to presenting to the ED, higher rates of complicated appendicitis, longer length of hospital stay, and longer duration of symptoms compared to prior to the COVID-19pandemic [19] , [20] , [21] , [22] .This case was a rare presentation of a perforated appendicitis complicated by a bronchoperitoneal fistula. Previously, the literature has reported cases of bronchoperitoneal or broncho-abdominal fistulas from subphrenic abscesses including as a sequela of appendicitis [23] , cholecystectomy [24] , colorectal anastomotic leak [25] , gastric leak status post laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy [26] , and as a sequela of retained drains [27] . In each case, the presence of an intra-abdominal collection eroded through the diaphragm and eventually though the pleura and into an airway. Although there were several reports of subphrenic abscesses and bronchoperitoneal fistulas in the early 1900s, such reports have become exceedingly rare in the contemporary literature. This is likely due to the advent and popularization of antibiotics. A variety of surgical procedures such as thoracoplasty, muscle flaps, and decortication have been used in the past to treat bronchoperitoneal fistulas, but recently there has been a trend toward nonoperative management and use of chest tubes, drains, and conventional and high frequency ventilation [28] . The general principles behind the management of these fistulas are to remove or control the provoking source and to reduce the pressure gradient in order to promote healing. In the setting of the patient's COVID-19 infection and bronchoperitoneal fistula, he was not able to adequately oxygenate and required VV ECMO. This had the added benefit of allowing the team to use rest ventilator settings in order to reduce the pressure gradient and promote fistula healing.After ECMO decannulation, the patient was transitioned to high frequency oscillatory ventilation.Since first being used in the 1970s, ECMO has seen significant improvement in outcomes.In the pediatric population, 72% survive to decannulation from pulmonary support 60% survive to discharge from the hospital [29] . [33] . In this case, we believed the patient to have a reversible process along with a good long-term prognosis and was therefore a reasonable candidate for ECMO. We encourage similar patients to be considered for ECMO therapy.

Conclusion

This rare case highlights the need for a higher suspicion for atypical presenting symptoms of COVID-19 and appendicitis in the pediatric, and especially Hispanic pediatric population. There is a high value of CT imaging in this group when the patient is stabilized. ECMO should be considered at ECMO centers when patients display refractory potentially reversible acute respiratory failure. Swift escalations in therapy and a multidisciplinary critical care team were necessary to stabilize and rescue this patient from the rapid clinical decline seen with this pathophysiology. Finally, despite the presence of an appendicolith, interval appendectomy is most J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f appropriate for the critically ill patient recovering from acute hypoxic respiratory failure requiring VV ECMO.Patient Consent: Consent to publish the case report was not obtained. This report does not contain any personal information that could lead to the identification of the patient.

Funding:

No funding or grant support.Authorship: All authors attest that they meet the current ICMJE criteria for Authorship.

