

We read with great interest the manuscript by Dong et al. describing the clinical course of 4 patients with pre-existing heart failure infected by COVID-19. (1) The authors convey the message that patients with cardiovascular disease are more prone to adverse outcomes due to a direct inflammatory damage of the heart. (1) Patients had a severe end stage dilated cardiomyopathy (mean Left ventricular end diastolic diameter 8 ± 2,2 cm) and markedly impaired ventricular function (mean LVEF 25 ± 3.8 %)(1). It is not clear if they had been hospitalized for manifestations of the SARS-CoV-2 infection or for other causes, as the symptoms described were fatigue and mild cough, common to both respiratory infection and heart failure.All patients had acute myocardial injury, defined as rise & fall of troponin (cTn). As reference literature, the authors cite two papers showing epidemiological features and clinical aspects of COVID-19 patients not focused on cardiac involvement (1). Other reports, including 416 and 144 patients respectively and focused on acute cardiac injury (demonstrating a relationship between the elevated cTn, up to 28-fold increase of normal values and an adverse outcome), were not considered (2, 3) Although the authors claim having provided "a stronger evidence of myocardial injury in COVID-19", a direct link between the cardiac injury and COVID-19 appears rather uncertain in the population described (1). Patients with long-lasting heart failure and severely compromised functional status are burdened by high mortality in the course of any infection, even in the absence of a direct viral damage. COVID-19 may have contributed to heart failure worsening to some extent, even if the reported chest CT scan and the maintenance of spontaneous respiration do suggest a mild infection form. Finally, the lack of electrocardiographic and echocardiographic data (with the exception of left ventricular ejection fraction), and even more of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance data, necessary to characterize myocardial tissue structure and function, greatly limit the informative contribution of this paper. Additionally, the specific causes of death were not specified by the authors. 

AMERICAN COLLEGE OF CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION AUTHOR RESPONSIBILITIES: RELATIONSHIP WITH INDUSTRY AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE

In addition to disclosing relationship with industry and/or financial disclosures on the cover letter and title page of your manuscript, we ask that each author sign this form. 

*Corresponding Author's Responsibility

To avoid delay in the publication of your manuscript, complete and submit this form as quickly as possible.After you have submitted your electronic form, you will receive an email confirmation that includes a PDF copy. Please print and retain for your files. If for some reason you are unable to complete this form electronically, please contact the JACC office directly or print this form, fill in the spaces manually, and email, fax, or post mail a copy to: 

