

S-2 1. Modeling QCM Response to a Heterogeneous (Particle-like) Load.

Basic Considerations

It should be pointed out that the QCM sensor load for nano and microparticle size range is typically 20-200 mg m -2 (Ref. 1 ) that is considerably lower than the quartz crystal surface density equal to 2.510 6 mg m -2 (assuming the crystal thickness of 0.1 cm).Therefore, one can assume that the particle deposition occurs under the small-load (Sauerbrey) regime [2] [3] [4] where the complex QCM response is given by 5where f  is the frequency shift (a real number), S-3It should be mentioned that the force exerted on the crystal surface is different from the force acting on attached particle layer and depends on the rigidity of the adhesive contact, governed by specific surface interactions. Only for firmly fixed particles, which cannot neither translate or rotate relative to the surface, the net force on the interface is equal (and opposite in direction) to the force acting on particles. Under such situation, considered in this section, the net force exerted on particles consist of the inertia and hydrodynamic contributionswhere * F  is the complex net force, Np is the number of attached particles, ω=2πfF n0 is the angular velocity of the sensor oscillations, mp is the particle mass and * h F  is the excess hydrodynamic force per particle due to the flow oscillations that in a general case depends on the particle coverage and the structure of the particle layer 6 .Using Eq.(4) one can express the mechanical impedance in the following formConsidering Eq.(5) the frequency and dissipation shifts are given by is the Sauerbrey constant equal to 0.177 (mg m -2 ) s for F f = 510 6 Hz. It is also useful to define the following quantity

Hydrodynamic Forces in Shear Flows

The fluid velocity distribution over a plate undergoing harmonic oscillations in the tangential direction characterized by the angular velocity ω in a Newtonian liquid is governed by the following equation 7S-5where f  is the fluid density, V is the tangential fluid velocity component (depending on the normal to the surface coordinate z), t is the time and  is the fluid dynamic viscosity.The boundary condition at the surface is the followingwhere 0 V is the flow amplitude. The solution of Eq. (12) with this boundary conditions gives the analytical expression for the fluid velocity as a function of time and spacewhereis the hydrodynamic boundary layer thickness also referred to as the flow penetration length 5 .It is equal to 238, 137 and 106 nm for the first, third and fifths overtone, respectively (for the fundamental frequency of 5 10 6 s -1 (Hz) and the temperature of 298 K).The flow shear rate is given byThus, the shear rate at the particle center can be expressed aswhere a is the spherical particle radius.

S-6

On the other hand, the shear rate at the surface becomesIt is interesting to observe that the relaxation time of establishing the above shear flow pattern is given by 20) indicates that the hydrodynamic force on a particle attached to a surface in a simple shear is 1.704 times larger than the force exerted on the stationary particle in the bulk shear flow of the same rate.However, one should mention, that the Eq.(20) is strictly valid for simple shear flows,i.e., in our case for δ/a >> 1. For lower values of this parameter one can introduce the correction factor assuming that the effective shear rate is given by Eq.(16).By virtue of the quasi stationary flow assumption the hydrodynamic force on particle monolayer can be calculated generalizing the approach previously applied for the stationary simple-shear flows 6 where it is numerically calculated using the multipole expansion method that force per particle is given bywhere Ai is the universal function of the absolute coverage of particles defined asIt is shown in Ref. 6 that the exact numerical can be approximated where with a large precision for the particle coverage up to 0.85 by the following functionIt the low coverage limit Eq.(23) assumes the following linear formOn the other hand, for θ > 0.2 Eq.(23) predicts the following asymptotic dependenceIt is interesting to observe that the Ai function graphically shown in Fig. S1 is independent of the structure of the monolayers either a random one (derived from the random sequential adsorption modeling) or an equilibrium structure. This function also describes the effect of the streaming current reduction by deposited particles and is often used for the interpretation of the experimental data derived from electrokinetic methods for nanoparticles and protein molecules 9 adsorbed on solid substrates.S-8 where / a   and 1/ 1Accordingly,It should be mentioned that Eq.(28) is valid for arbitrary range of particle coverage and overtones. On the other hand, for  >> 1 and for vanishing particle coverage, the QCM mass is given byFrom Eq.(28) one can deduce that the water factor w = / Q  is given by   One can predict that w linearly increases with / a  , i.e., inversely proportional to the square root of the overtone number n0 .Interesting analytical solution was obtained in Ref. 5 for the opposite limit where the hydrodynamic boundary layer becomes smaller than the particle radius, which occurs for larger particles and overtone number. Under such conditions one can assume that the particle attached to the interface effectively oscillates in a stagnant fluid. In consequence, to calculate the excess hydrodynamic force, one can use the known solution derived for sphere in unbounded fluid 7 . As shown in Ref. 5 the hydrodynamic force and torque on the particle are given bywhere Vp is the complex particle velocity, which generally differs from the sensor velocity Vi.Only if the adhesive contact is perfectly rigid Vp = Vi and Eq.(33) simplifies to the limiting form 0 2Obviously, under the rigid contact regime, the torque does not contribute to the force balance.Using Eq.(34), the normalized force on particle can be expressed asS-11Substituting this into Eq. (7)  is the maximum coverage equal to 0.547 for larger particle under the random sequential adsorption regime (RSA) 10 .S-12

The Soft Contact Model

The soft contact model was formulated in Ref. 5 where rc is the radius of the flattened particle contact area given by 2 

S-15

Hence, as pointed out in Ref. 5 , for large overtone number and larger particles one can expect positive frequency shifts, resulting in negative QCM mass.

Basic characteristic of the polymer particles.

Table S1. Basic physicochemical parameters of the polymer particles used in this work: pH 4.0, I = 10 -2 M, NaCl, T = 298 K.Particle suspension dp [nm] DLS dp [nm] AFM dp [nm] diffr.Footnotes: A70-A800 are the positively charged amidine latexes, LSfi800 is the fibrinogen/sulfonate latex complex prepared by physical adsorption according to the procedure described in Ref. 11 ; particle density p = 1.05 g cm -3 , dp = 2 a -particle diameter (DLS -dynamic light scattering, AFM -atomic force microscopy, diffr. -laser diffractometry), zeta potential derived from LDV (electrophoresis).S-16

Modeling Adsorption Kinetics of Particles in the QCM cell.

As discussed in Ref. 10 particle deposition kinetics under convective-diffusion transport conditions under solid substrates (for example QCM sensor) can be theoretically described using a hybrid approach exploiting the convective-diffusion equationwhere n is the number concentration of particles, t is the time, D is the translation diffusion coefficient, k is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, F is the external force vector and V is the unperturbed (macroscopic) fluid velocity vector.Eq.(51) is coupled with the surface layer transport equation where the fluid convection effects are neglected 10,12where ja is the net adsorption/desorption flux, g S is the characteristic cross-section of the particle, gp Θ S N  is the macromolecule coverage, Np is the particle surface concentration, ka, kd are the adsorption and desorption constants, n(a) is the number concentration of particles at the adsorption boundary layer of the thickness a and   B  is the generalized blocking function (more appropriately referred to as the available surface function).Under convective transport, where the particle concentration n(a) remains in a local equilibrium with the surface coverage, the constitutive expression for the adsorption flux, Eq.(52) can be expressed as 10where K = ka / kc is the dimensionless coupling constants, Kd = kd/(Sgkcnb ) is the dimensionless desorption constant, and kc is the bulk transfer rate constant, known in analytical form for many types of flows and nb is the bulk number concentration of particles.S-17Eq.(53) can be integrated, which yields the following dependencewhere   is the initial coverage of particles.Eq.(54) represents a general solution for particle deposition kinetics under convection driven transport. However, it can only be evaluated by numerical integration methods if the blocking function is known in an analytical form.It is useful to express Eq.(54) in terms of the mass coverage of particles connected with the dimensionless coverage bywhere m1 is the mass of a single particle.It should be mentioned that in terms of the QCM nomenclature, the coverage Γ is the so called 'dry' mass.Using this definition one can express Eq.(54) in the formwhere cb = m1 nb is the mass concentration of particles in the bulk. Moreover, in order to explicitly calculate particle deposition kinetics from Eq.(14) one should know the blocking function, which can be conveniently acquired from the random sequential adsorption (RSA) modeling 10 

