

The National Council Licensure Examination for Registered Nurses (NCLEX-RN) measures the 37 required competencies of new graduate nurses to safely and effectively perform as an entry-level 38 registered nurse (National Council State Boards of Nursing, 2018). Pass rates on the NCLEX-RN are used 39 by communities, regulatory bodies, and accrediting agencies to determine the quality and effectiveness 40 of prelicensure nursing programs. Therefore, success of graduates on their first NCLEX-RN attempt is a 41 priority for nursing programs and has generated an emphasis to offer remediation to students who are 42 identified at risk for not passing the examination. 43 Mee and Schreiner (2016) nursing schools continue to use these 49 predictors to identify at-risk students. 50 The literature has not identified a specific teaching strategy to be most effective for 51 remediation and more than one strategy should be included in remediation plans (Mee & 52 Schreiner, 2016). Pennington and Spurlock (2010) stated that a remediation "prescription" is not 53 supported by the evidence, and it remains unclear which remediation strategies have positive 54 outcomes, and which do not (p. 490). Previous research has discussed the importance of 55 providing interventions to high-risk students despite the lack of evidence supporting the efficacy 56 of the interventions (Ashley & O'Neil, 1991) .

57

Most nursing programs use multiple methods and strategies for remediation (Pennington 58 & Spurlock, 2010). A systematic review identified common themes related to remediation, that 59 were mainly based on student self-reports. Those themes included: students should develop 60 individualized study plans, accept responsibility for NCLEX-RN preparation using resources, 61 and use standardized tests to assist in identification of weak areas (Pennington & Spurlock, 2010 ). Custer (2016) discusses individualizing the approach and using student input and 63 providing a challenging learning environment as strategies of establishing remediation.

64

The COVID-19 pandemic has created barriers to providing remediation for nursing 65 students. In March 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the learning environments for most 66 students attending institutions of higher education shifted from face-to-face to a distance learning 67 environment. Distance learning, distance education, e-learning and online learning are terms 68 often used interchangeably and involve "the physical separation of teachers and students during 69 instruction and the use of various technologies to facilitate student-teacher and student-students 

74

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic a small regional university in the Midwest United States 75 had to shift their remediation efforts to a distance learning environment to meet the needs of 76 students preparing for their NCLEX-RN. An on-line platform strategy was implemented to 77 allow continuation of remediation efforts for students identified at risk of NCLEX-RN failure.

78

The literature related to nursing remediation in a distance learning environment is non-existent.

79

The purpose of this article is to describe an approach to the identification of at-risk students and The course was traditionally taught in-person and required active participation by 101 students. However, due to the COVID-19 pandemic which impacted the on-campus presence of 102 faculty and students, distance learning methods of remediation had to be implemented. There 103 was no literature to support the most effective method for offering a distance learning approach, 104 as a result, the instructor had to develop and implement an approach that was interactive, 105 meaningful, and effective. Access to an electronic NCLEX-RN question bank was purchased by the nursing 128 department for all remediation students. In subsequent virtual meetings, students and the 129 instructor met using Zoom and began reviewing questions. The question bank was used to aid in 130 student critical thinking skills, retention of information, and test-taking strategies. A small number of questions were used during each meeting. A quiz was generated focusing on the 132 NCLEX-RN blueprint as well as overall identified weaknesses of the group.

133

As a group, students read the question on the computer screen and using the chat option, 134 they privately communicated their answer to the instructor. This required each student to answer 135 the question independently without knowledge of how the other students were answering the 136 question. In the face-to-face modality students used index cards labeled one to five to select 137 answers to the questions. In that environment, responses of each student were not confidential. As the course progressed, the instructor monitored the ability of students to answer 169 questions correctly during meeting times and by viewing their progress within the question bank.

170

The instructor was able to see the number of questions the students had completed, the content 171 areas they were reviewing, and their performance on questions on independent practice exams.

172

When students self-identified as being prepared and confident they could pass the 173 NCLEX-RN or when the instructor felt the student was ready to test, an individualized meeting 174 was scheduled electronically. During the meeting, the instructor would discuss stress reducing strategies to assist the student the day before and day of testing. This included relaxation tips for 176 the day of and the night before testing, ensuring a good night of sleep, eating a meal prior to 177 testing, mapping out the drive time to the testing center and a variety of other strategies based on 178 the student's needs and what they found to be most stressful about testing.

180

Collection of data related to NCLEX-RN outcomes was approved as exempt by the 181 university institutional review board. All collected data for reporting the results of the Those two failures were at-risk students who only attended the five required meetings.

189

Both students tested despite the instructor's recommendation that they needed additional 190 remediation and that they were not prepared to test. Additionally, these two students' 191 performance was evaluated by the course instructor, and it was noted that these students failed to 192 complete their assigned independent practice exams. reported that answering questions and reviewing those they missed then later answering those questions correctly, proved that they were retaining knowledge and increased their confidence.

198

Students had also commented to faculty that they were appreciative for the opportunity to 

