

disorders), suggesting to implement phone calls and video conference-based visits only for emergencies or specific urgent patient requests.Considering how much COVID-19-induced social isolation and unplanned school closure (extended until next September in Italy) may affect mental health of children and adolescents (especially for more vulnerable subgroups, as those with pre-existing psychiatric problems or learning difficulties) [4] , was this the only and most appropriate intervention that could be put in place for these young individuals? Are there adequate technological supports throughout Italy to set up remote work and home care? Or did this increase the national disparities between users of the most technological areas and users without such possibilities, the latter often living within families with a low socioeconomic status? In this social fragmentation, the area of marginalization/abandonment may be further extended, increasing up the risk of worsening mental disorders. Finally, if access to outpatient services was not facilitated (but often made difficult by the "material closing" of the doors), in the isolation of their room, without specialized rehabilitative interventions and dedicated case management, who could intercept their suffering? Could emergency phone calls or video conferences be enough (especially for young people with Severe Mental Illness [SMI])? Or is it another time delay of specific interventions that cannot be further delayed (specifically for young individuals with early psychopathology)? And what about families and caregivers? With what support have we decided to sustain them? By depriving them of rehabilitation time and replacing it with the Internet connection? In this perspective, mental health of children and adolescents even more impacts the risk of loneliness, in addiction with academic achievement gaps.All that was done was patching up urgent patient requests. Nothing was structured in the direction of preventing psychopathological relapses. Italian DMHs (similarly to the school service) decided to stop/postpone their activities rather than to ask themselves what really could be done for the patient, safely and proactively. They decided not to play the game. Was an alternative choice possible and practicable? As De Gregori [5] wrote: "a player: you distinguish him for courage, altruism and creativity". Therefore, we strongly suggest that Italian medical, educational and institutional authorities should implement as soon as possible strategic plans for a progressive re-start of mental health outpatient activities and routine therapeuticrehabilitation interventions (as well as a re-start of school/ educational services), especially for more vulnerable subgroups (e.g. young people with SMI, early severe psychopathology and learning difficulties), so as not to further defer the no longer deferred.

