| INTRODUC TI ON

for persons in arguments against mandates. 9 At least one transplant center in the United States has been named in the media as denying liver transplantation to a candidate who refused pretransplant COVID-19 vaccination. 10 We believe that it is essential to specify the ethical analysis of vaccine mandates for staff and candidates to the novel context of COVID-19 vaccination. Such policies have individual and public health implications, so we present an analysis incorporating individual-and public health-oriented bioethics principles, including non-maleficence, beneficence, and respect for autonomy; net utility, transparency, and justice. 11, 12 We first address COVID-19 vaccine mandates for transplant center staff, drawing on previous literature for influenza vaccines. Indeed, many of the ethical arguments supporting COVID-19 vaccine mandates for transplant center staff apply equally to all healthcare workers. We then address requirements for transplant candidates. We conclude by acknowledging the broader context surrounding proposed COVID-19 vaccine mandates, including vaccination of caregivers, use of vaccination status in allocation of other healthcare resources, mandates for other vaccines, and stark inequities in vaccine availability around the world.

| REQU IRING COVID -19 VACCINE S FOR TR ANS PL ANT S TAFF

Regarding the relationship between an individual healthcare worker and patient, it is a familiar tenet of all codes of medical ethics that the healthcare worker has a fiduciary duty to promote the wellbeing of the patient, and to not harm the patient. 13 Previous authors have argued that these duties establish an obligation for healthcare workers to be vaccinated and justify influenza vaccine mandates, whereas objections point out that there are few data demonstrating hypothesized benefits and harms. [14] [15] [16] For COVID-19, there have been confirmed nosocomial outbreaks beginning with asymptomatic healthcare workers or amplified by transmission chains involving healthcare workers resulting in patient illness and death. 17, 18 Transplant patients are particularly vulnerable, even if they are themselves vaccinated. [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] Infections among transplant candidates may lead to waitlist inactivation, missed transplant opportunities, or death; infections among transplant recipients may lead to death or graft loss. 24, 25 Additionally, transplant centers and other healthcare institutions have fiduciary obligations to protect their patients by overseeing vaccination among their staff.The proposed duty of healthcare workers and institutions to protect patients through vaccination is in tension with healthcare workers' autonomy, although autonomy is not an absolute overriding ethical primary. 26 Mandates may also conflict with other expectations in the employer-employee relationship. Mandates applied with short notice may appear to abruptly change terms of employment for existing employees and conflict with an expectation for transparency, and mandates that are applied differently for different types of employees may conflict with an expectation for just treatment.Even if all employees are treated the same, some will be affected differently by vaccine mandates because of differences in knowledge, for example, between clinical and nonclinical staff, differences in vaccination preferences, or differences in the probability of certain harms, such as thrombocytopenic thrombosis syndrome affecting mostly young women after vaccination with Ad26.COV2.S or ChAdOx1. 27, 28 Moreover, disparities in vaccination may overlap with other disadvantages in the healthcare workplace from racism, sexism, or power differentials between professional roles. 29 These concerns could be mitigated through thoughtful implementation strategies: providing sufficient time for employees to contemplate a vaccination decision, creating accessible educational materials for all members of the healthcare workforce, and allowing for reasonable medical objections to prevent serious harms.Religious and philosophical objections, an exercise of autonomy, would not be supported on the basis of avoidance of harms, but may be legally protected in some settings. Importantly, vaccination would be expected to benefit, not harm healthcare workers; thus, mandatory vaccination is not in conflict with employers' duty to not harm their employees. Vaccination also promotes a safe working environment for all staff-most healthcare workplace-related severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) exposures come from contact with other healthcare workers, whereas a minority come from contact with patients. 30, 31 Healthcare workers and institutions are also public health agents and should seek to promote the public health and not to detract from it. 12 Vaccinated healthcare workers can accomplish this directly through their participation in community immunity-in one US study, state laws promoting influenza vaccination for hospital workers were associated with a statistically significant decrease in population-level mortality from pneumonia and influenza. 32 In addition, reducing COVID-19 illnesses among healthcare workers ensures that more workers will be available to participate in patient care amidst ongoing surges. Vaccine mandates for healthcare workers can also have an indirect impact on public health by setting a positive example, broadcasting vaccine confidence, and building trust between public health agents and the population. 14 Bioethical obligations of beneficence, nonmaleficence and fidelity to patients and to the population favor and indeed necessitate healthcare worker vaccination, justifying some intrusion on healthcare worker autonomy. Experience with influenza vaccine requirements suggests that a COVID-19 vaccine requirement, rather than increasing convenience, education, or incentives, will be the most effective strategy for promoting vaccine uptake in settings where vaccines are already widely available. 

| REQU IRING COVID -19 VACCINE S FOR TR AN S PL ANT C AND IDATE S

COVID-19 vaccine mandates raise unique considerations for transplant candidates. As has been shown for influenza vaccines and theorized for COVID-19 vaccines, pre-transplant vaccination can be expected to benefit candidates by conferring better protection than vaccination delayed until after transplant or no vaccination at all. 33 Transplant candidates can be expected to have high rates of seroconversion after COVID-19 vaccination (73%-88%), 34, 35 whereas transplant recipients have a reduced humoral response. 36, 37 Theoretical risks such as alloimmunization also have not been borne out with other vaccines, although vaccines do transiently impact assays of donor sensitization. 38 Overall, COVID-19 vaccines are safe for individuals with end-stage organ dysfunction, and strongly recommended to protect these patients from serious illness and death. 39 As for healthcare workers, exceptions should be made for serious medical contraindications to vaccination, where vaccination would be harmful to the candidate. date. In addition to risks related to COVID-19 infection, an additional hypothesized risk is that transplant candidates who refuse recommended vaccination will also be non-adherent to post-transplant instructions, although very limited data exist to evaluate this hypothesis. 40 One study found that families who refused childhood vaccination were also less likely to present for routine pediatric care, but whether this would be true for transplant-specific care or for individuals who refuse COVID-19 vaccines has never been tested. 41 Transplant centers should balance criteria to maximize net utility with attention to justice and equity, and listing criteria should 

| PED IATRI C TR AN S PL ANTATI ON

Currently, COVID-19 vaccines are not available to most children around the world both because additional data are anticipated to support their use in some age groups and because children have not been prioritized for vaccination since they tend to have less severe COVID-19 illness when compared with adults. This holds true for pediatric transplant recipients who have less severe COVID-19 illness as compared with adult transplant recipients. 43 

| OTHER ROLE S , OTHER PATIENTS , OTHER VACCINE S

The ethical arguments for COVID-19 vaccine mandates for either healthcare workers or transplant candidates might be extended in many directions. Transplant caregivers should seek to protect transplant recipients, and cocooning strategy of vaccinating close contacts is recommended for many vaccines. 44 However, transplant centers are not empowered to require caregivers to be vaccinated without imposing consequences harmful to candidates. Because caregiver vaccination status is not readily modifiable by the candidate, it is a less appropriate listing criterion than the candidate's own vaccination status, although both could be expected to improve candidate health, public health, and net utility from transplantation. The majority of available vaccines require a two-dose series for recipients to be considered fully vaccinated.

TA B L E 1 Country-specific considerations for COVID-19 vaccine mandates from a limited selection of countries

c Unpublished data from the Italian Health Ministry and update from National Transplant Center (CNT), Rome, Italy.

