

The study brings analyses of the risks of primary cases to infect at least one other household member, as well as that of other household members being infected by a primary case in his or her household. The latter concept is defined as an "attack rate", where the proportion of infected household members is analyzed weighted on the potentially secondary case level. The concepts of "risks" and "rates" may sometimes be used a bit different in different scientific setups and I have no objections to the chosen definition of an "attack rate". The authors could perhaps still consider validating it with the analysis of an individual "risk" of getting infected by a primary case?Naturally, not all positive cases are followed up with a genome sequencing and there are a few steps of selection that may cause some bias in the cases that end up being included in the analytical design. The first step is that of the PCR test being analyzed at the TestCenter Denmark, a condition that could be spelled out more explicitly at p5. As far as I can judge, the authors provide a good rationale for how the selection of cases is unlikely to produce any serious biases in the analyses that are presented. The cases that had not led to any genome sequencing had a much lower transmissibility, at 17%, than those cases that went through genome sequencing, which is commented on in the final discussion.In terms of substance findings, the authors would better refer to the age profile of transmissibility as being J-rather than U-shaped. And to pay better attention to the strongly elevated transmissibility of the virus among elderly household members than to the less elevated risk of spreading the virus for small children. The authors could also discuss the fact that the majority of household members were after all not infected by a positive case in the household, which could perhaps be regarded as slightly surprising.

R2:

The study brings analyses of the risks of primary cases to infect at least one other household member, as well as that of other household members being infected by a primary case in his or her household. The latter concept is defined as an "attack rate", where the proportion of infected household members is analyzed weighted on the potentially secondary case level. The concepts of "risks" and "rates" may sometimes be used a bit different in different scientific setups and I have no objections to the chosen definition of an "attack rate". The authors could perhaps still consider validating it with the analysis of an individual "risk" of getting infected by a primary case? AU: We agree that the definitions are not always clear and therefore we took care in defining concepts have defined it clearly in the manuscript. The attack rate is a well known concept in epidemiology. It mirrors the incidence of illness in a defined population who is exposed to a defined health event in a short time period. It is usually expressed as a proportion. In the present context it is a measure of illness in the susceptible exposed population is an expression of the susceptibility to infection, given that you live in a household with an infected person. Thus, we define the "risk" for potential secondary cases getting infected by a primary case is in this manuscript defined as the "attack rate": "The (secondary) attack rate is defined as the proportion of potential secondary cases that tested positive." (line 153-156) . Thus, we believe this is covered in the analyses. We have chosen to focus on transmissibility and not susceptibility. However, we do agree that susceptibility heterogeneity is important to further investigate.The transmission rates and transmission risk are not standard concepts in epidemiology, but were for the present study defined as measures of the probability that a primary case were successful in spreading the virus. Again, this also relates to the susceptibility of the exposed population, but also many other factors including behavior, contact patterns and biology. It will be beyond the scope to discuss these issues in detail, but it is important to be clear about the definitions.Naturally, not all positive cases are followed up with a genome sequencing and there are a few steps of selection that may cause some bias in the cases that end up being included in the analytical design. The first step is that of the PCR test being analyzed at the TestCenter Denmark, a condition that could be spelled out more explicitly at p5. As far as I can judge, the authors provide a good rationale for how the selection of cases is unlikely to produce any serious biases in the analyses that are presented. The cases that had not led to any genome sequencing had a much lower transmissibility, at 17%, than those cases that went through genome sequencing, which is commented on in the final discussion.In terms of substance findings, the authors would better refer to the age profile of transmissibility as being J-rather than U-shaped. And to pay better attention to the strongly elevated transmissibility of the virus among elderly household members than to the less elevated risk of spreading the virus for small children. The authors could also discuss the fact that the majority of household members were after all not infected by a positive case in the household, which could perhaps be regarded as slightly surprising.A few temporal statements in the text could be added as the spread of and different lineages of the virus is still something of a moving target.There are some missing words in the sentence that stretches over rows 150-153.

AU:

We are sorry that our explanation has been vague. We include all tests performed in Denmarkboth from hospitals and TestCenter Denmark. However, we only have Ct values on the tests performed at TestCenter Denmark. We have added a clarification in line 122: "Positive tests were sequenced from both hospitals and TCDK."We agree that the pattern is better described as a J shape, and have changed the U-shape to a Jshape. Line 235.We have also added some reflections of the cause of this pattern, and how it might change in the future. Line 290-296: "However, children were generally still less transmissible than persons aged 60 and above, who were most transmissible ( Figure 1 ). This pattern is affected by the behavior of people, and could reflect that couples often sleep together, increasing the risk of transmission. Furthermore, the age profile of the transmissibility may have implications for the decision of vaccinating children in the future. Indeed, the transmissibility of children under five years of age to other household members is not negligible, and this aspect may have even further ramifications where the delta variant has been the dominant strain."For the sake of brevity, we have not further discussed the result that the majority of potential secondary cases were not infected.We agree that the different lineages are moving targets. Since the manuscript was submitted, the epidemiological situation has changed in most countries. B.1.1.7 (the alpha variant) is no longer dominant but by and large has been replaced with B.1.617.2 (the delta variant). Furthermore, household transmission will additionally change due to vaccination uptake; this will reduce susceptibility among potential secondary cases. Nonetheless, we believe that our findings is of public health relevance, because (1) the work reflects a conceptual model for understanding variantrelated transmission differences; this should be generalizable to other strains as well, (2) adds further to the understanding of the epidemiology of B.1.1.7 in particular and SARS-CoV-2 in general, and (3) underscores the role of the household domain in SARS-CoV-2 transmission, including the non-negligible transmission from small children to other household members.We have updated parts of the introduction and the discussion to include these aspects.We have clarified this. Line 164-167: "As the transmissibility can be dependent on the age of the primary case, the age of the potential secondary case, and the viral load (measured by cycle threshold (Ct) value) 20,21,22 , we included these as explanatory variables." Reviewer #3 (Remarks to the Author):Thank you for the overall positive assessment. We are very delighted and agree with the reviewer that these results are important and can contribute to the policy response to the ongoing pandemic. We hope that our answer below will help convince you of the robustness of our results.Major comments: R3: 1. How could the authors rule out community transmission within households? AU: In short, we cannot. However, we believe that the probability of acquiring infection from the community is generally much lower than the probability of being infected from an infector at home. Moreover, we chose a study period where many national restrictions were still at place, e.g., school closures, and after Christmas, where it is likely that many households interacted. Additionally, once a case is identified she and her household are expected per policy to isolate themselves from the community. Therefore, we believe the risk is negligible.We try to address this concern in Table 2, where we found that 96% of secondary cases had the same lineage as the primary case, when the primary case was infected with B.1.1.7. This was estimated at a time, where many other lineages were present in the population and B.1.1.7 amounted to less than 25% of all cases ( Figure S1 ). This indicates that infections most likely stem from household transmission. Table S5 , column IV, we only include secondary cases identified 4-14 days after the primary case. These cases are likely to have been isolated from the community and hence been infected in the household.No other rules than the date of the RT-PCR positive test were used to define primary and secondary cases.We thank the reviewer for the suggestion. However, this additional analysis would require new data that we do not have access to and a new set of assumptions that we cannot validate using the present data. For instance, we do not have access to the exposure history of cases, which strongly limits us in the definition of the generation of transmission.We have now elaborated on the description of the situation in Denmark during the study period. Line 104-110: "During the study period, the population were tested due to a large variety of reasons, including being able to attend work with a negative test. Contact tracing is one of the main non-pharmaceutical interventions in Denmark and thus primary cases in this study could be discovered due to centralized or independent contact tracing efforts, symptoms, and/or screening. Persons identified with infection were asked to self-isolate within the household, however, in many cases self-isolation was not fully possible, e.g., due to lack of space, number of bathrooms, or caregiving needs of children." Furthermore, the possibility of isolation facilities outside the households, i.e., "corona hotels", was available in all Danish municipalities. The stay was free-of-charge and included food. Less than 1% of cases in January 2021 used this offer. R3: 4. Is there any differences in epidemiological characteristics (e.g., age distribution) between cases who were selected for WGS or not? If yes, do the authors believe their conclusions are robust enough? Please also state whether there is a difference in epidemiological characteristics (e.g., age and clinical severity) between samples obtained from hospitals and TCDK?We have added two graphs on the probability of the sample being selected for WGS by age ( Figure S5 ), and by week ( Figure S6 ). There is no clear evidence of a correlation between age and the probability of being selected for WGS during our study period ( Figure S5 and table below). However, we do find a clear correlation with age prior to our study period. (To make Figure S3 comparable with Figure S5 , we have changed Figure S3 to only include the study period.)Persons tested in hospitals are a mix of patients and healthcare personnel (line 113-114). We do not have data on clinical severity or reasons for being tested. Lastly, all regressions including Ct values are excluding primary cases identified at hospitals, as we only have Ct values on tests obtained at TCDK. Hence, if there were large differences in the populations across testing sites (primary cases identified at hospitals vs. primary cases identified at TCDK), we would see large changes in the estimates, when excluding these (Table 3) . We do not see this.If we test the probability of being selected for WGS by age and testing site (TCDK vs. hospital), i.e., Prob(WGS selection) = AgeGroup + TCDK*AgeGroup + epsilon, where AgeGroup are 5-year age groups and TCDK is an indicator for being identified at TCDK, we find no significant interaction with TCDK. In particular, we find a p-value of 0.24 in the joint F-test. (However, if we included periods before our study period, we find a significant difference in the probability of being selected for WGS across age and testing place.) See table below. This supports that the selection to WGS is not age dependent in our study period. R3: 5. Besides epidemic lineage, age and viral load of an infector, there are several other factors that might be associated with SARS-CoV-2 transmission, e.g., levels of exposure to an infector, generation of transmission and clustering effect attributed to an infector and a household. I am concerned that the model specifications in Table S4 and Table S5 may be not comprehensive, and this may affect the accuracy of estimated transmissibility of the variant B.1.1.7. In addition, authors failed to report details regarding methods and results of generalized linear regression model, such as the definition and regression coefficients of each covariate, model fit statistics, and hypothesis testing results.We agree with the reviewer that there are several important factors related to SARS-CoV-2 transmissions that are not included in the reported analysis. Some of the factors mentioned are very difficult to obtain information on and were not available to us. We think that this is sufficiently clear from the description of the analyses given on page 7-8 and 53-55. The principles used in the regression modelling, including model search, is described in general terms in the methods section. We have further elaborated in the methods section, line 157-159: "We estimated the transmission rate and transmission risk for each 10 year age group separately and stratified by lineage B.1.1.7 and other lineages, using a generalized linear regression model.". We have omitted parameter estimates and hypothesis testing results from the manuscript for the sake of brevity. We have included a list of the parameter estimates and test indices below. We are happy to include this in the appendix, but we feel that it would take up too much space in the main text of the manuscript. R3: 6. In Figure 1 , the transmission rate and transmission risk among different age groups might be confounded by other factors, e.g., age of their contacts. Please add age-specific transmission matrix, including: 1) number of primary cases and their potential secondary cases by age group, and 2) number of primary cases and their secondary cases by age group.We fully agree that the transmissibility of a primary case is dependent of the susceptibility of the potential secondary cases, e.g., age. Below, we have included the transmission rate for each lineage stratified by age of the primary case and age of the potential secondary cases, including the standard errors clustered at the household level. Note, that we have to group them to have precision in the estimates. Number of primary cases along with the number of potential secondary cases and positive secondary cases are included in table "Table S4 Summary statistics split by primary case age and their associated secondary cases". We think that adding this information is informative. Hence, we have added table S3 and S4.We are not sure that we fully understand the reviewers suggestion. For estimating a random effects model, we have to assume exogeneity of the unobserved individual heterogeneity with respect to the individual (unobserved) heterogeneity. We have clustered standard errors on the household/primary case level, and handled this in that way. Therefore, we have not added any additional results here. Fig. S4 -S6.We have added vertical grid lines on the x-axis in Figure S4 , S6, S7 and S8, as requested.(Note, Figure S4 -S6 in the original version is now Figure S4 , S7, S8.) R3: 8. Please specify the proportion of households with "co-primary cases" and please repeat this random process for several times to account for the uncertainty of transmission.We have specified the number and proportion of households with co-primary cases in line 179-181: "We furthermore performed our main analyses excluding households with co-primary cases (405 households, 5%) to investigate the sensitivity to misclassification of primary cases." We agree that it is good to check the robustness of the results to the assignment of co-primary cases. Therefore, we have performed our main analyses entirely excluding households with co-primary cases. We have performed the analyses in Figure 1 , Table 3 , and Figure S10 excluding households with co-primary cases. The results are added as additional robustness analyses as Table S6 , Figure  S12 , Figure S13 .Thank you for the comments. We have added 95%-CIs clustered on the household level for the attack rates in Table 1 , 2, S2, S3, S4. The estimated fixed effects coefficients along with the pvalues are included in the extended Table 3 below. However, we do not believe that this extension adds to the general readability of Table 3 and therefore suggest that we do not change our Table 3 . If the editor wants to include the fixed effects estimates, we suggest including the extended Table 3 in the appendix. Thank you for the comments.We have included the following "Moreover, uncertainties regarding the heterogeneous transmissibility across lineage B.1.1.7 and other circulating lineages are present, as we did not have data on symptoms and exposure history." in the discussion.We have included the " Figure: Age-by-age Transmission Rate by lineage" as " Figure S14 : Age-by-age Transmission Rate stratified by lineage" in the supplementary appendix and have included "Number of primary cases / number of potential secondary cases / number of positive secondary cases" below the standard errors.

R3:

Households are important venues for SARS-CoV-2 transmission when widespread community control measures are in place, which urges prioritization of studies on transmissibility and risk factors for household SARS-CoV-2 transmission. As SARS-CoV-2 variant B.1.1.7 continues to spread across the world, there is still a lack of knowledge regarding data-based household secondary attack rate and associated risk factors for the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 variant B.1.1.7. In this context, the authors used comprehensive administrative data from Denmark, comprising the full population, all SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR tests, and all whole genome sequencing lineage data, to estimate household transmissibility by age, lineage and viral load. This would provide valuable information for understanding how the mutations affect the transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2. But I would argue that the methods and results of this manuscript need to be improved.3. I suggest authors add more details regarding the implementation of non-pharmaceutical interventions and COVID-19 surveillance system during study period in Denmark. In particular: 1) Was the primary case identified through symptom-based surveillance? Were clusters with presymptomatic and asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 transmission involved in this study? 2) Was the primary case "removed" from the household after the confirmation? 3) Did all potential secondary cases receive RT-PCR testing regularly?The authors have provided clear explanations and included new analyses to clarify the ambiguity of the original manuscript, and most of my comments have been addressed properly. However, the large uncertainties remain regarding the estimated transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2 lineage B.1.1.7, due to a lack of detailed information on the generation of transmissions and exposure history. Thus, I suggest authors should at least add one paragraph to consider the potential impact of data availability on the estimated transmissibility in discussion section. Moreover, " Figure: Age-by-age Transmission Rate by lineage" shown in response letter should be included in appendix, which would give more information regarding agespecific susceptibility and infectivity to readers. In addition, numerator and denominator of transmission rate/risk in such figure should be given accordingly.

Moreover, in

Lastly, we have further elaborated on this in the discussion. Line 343-345: "As there were several lineages circulating in the study period, this increases confidence that the data reflects household transmission rather than community transmission." R3: 2. Besides the date of RT-PCR positive for each infector, is there any other rules that were used to define primary and secondary cases? If not, I suggest authors define the generation of transmission for each infector by considering the combination of exposure history and key transmission parameters (e.g., incubation period), and then estimate the transmissibility by generation of transmission, lineages, age and Ct values.

R3

: 7. The visualization in this paper needs to be improved.: 7.1) Fig. 1 and Fig. S7-S9 show transmission rate and transmission risk by age, lineage and Ct value, but I'd also like to see absolute numbers of infected primary cases, potential secondary cases and secondary case by age, lineage and Ct value. I suggest the authors give these numbers for each key node in Fig. 1 and Fig. S7-S9 .: 7.2) Besides the observed transmission rate and transmission risk, one additional figure could be added to show the predicted probability of infection by age and lineage using generalized linear mixed model.

Minor comments:

R3: 1. I suggest the authors add 95% confidence interval for secondary attack rates in Table 1,  Table 2 and Table S2 , and give coefficients with the p-value and odds ratio (OR) for each covariate in Table 3 .

