

how the regulatory focus has been shaping behaviours during the COVID-19 pandemic is extremely limited. One study found that people who were single and more focused on general prevention (vs. promotion) reported having sex with casual partners less frequently one month later because they perceived more pandemic-related threats (Rodrigues, Balzarini, et al., 2021) . Another study found that people more focused on prevention (vs. promotion) in sexuality were more careful searching for information related to the COVID-19 virus (Rodrigues, 2021) . This study shows that one's regulatory focus in specific domains (e.g., sexual health) can also shape broader health behaviours, which other researchers also argued for (e.g., Ferrer et al., 2017) .We launched a study examining the impact of regulatory focus in sexuality on sexual behaviours before the onset of COVID-19 (27 November 2019) . By coincidence, the second measurement point on June 2020 (T2) occurred after a global pandemic had been announced, and subsequent social distancing measures were implemented in response (Balmford et al., 2020; United Nations, 2020) .We took this valuable opportunity to examine for the first time if the regulatory focus on sexuality predicted how people responded and felt during the pandemic. Specifically, a longitudinal study with people from the UK and the USA examined if those who were more focussed on prevention (vs. promotion) prior to the COVID-19 pandemic perceived more health risks, behaved in accordance with their motives, and experienced more positive functioning.

| THE ROLE OF REGULATORY FOCUS ON HEALTH

The Regulatory Focus Theory (Higgins, 2015) postulates that people who are more focussed on prevention are motivated by security and protection and strive to avoid risks even at the cost of new opportunities. In contrast, people who are more focussed on promotion are motivated by growth and advancement and strive to obtain gains, even at the cost of risks. Research has shown that people more focussed on prevention are more aware of health threats (Rodrigues et al., 2019) and tend to be more careful with their health (Zou & Scholer, 2016) . For example, these people are more likely to adhere to medical prescriptions (Avraham et al., 2016) , take cancer screening tests (Ferrer et al., 2017) , maintain smoking cessation (Fuglestad et al., 2013) , and use condoms with casual partners (Evans-Paulson et al., 2021; Rodrigues et al., 2020) . Having more control over their behaviours (Lemarié et al., 2019; Rodrigues, Lopes, & Carvalho, 2021) arguably helps people more focussed on prevention to enact health behaviours and feel protected against threats.Examining the role of regulatory focus during this pandemic, one study showed that people who were single and more focused on prevention perceived more pandemic-related threats and consequently engaged in oral sex and intercourse less frequently and with fewer casual partners later on (Rodrigues, Balzarini, et al., 2021) .Another study showed that people who were single and more focused on prevention in sexuality perceived to be well informed about the pandemic, were more likely to retrieve COVID-19 information from reliable sources (e.g., scientific reports), were less fearful of becoming infected with COVID-19, had fewer intentions to have casual sex (Rodrigues, 2021) . This suggests that having a focus on prevention can motivate people to be aware of health threats and more careful when searching for information and procedures that can help them protect their health. By doing so, they should feel more protected against infection (see also Rodrigues, Lopes, & Carvalho, 2021) . Supporting this reasoning, people who felt that they were well-informed about COVID-19 also perceived to have the necessary skills to avoid infection (e.g., acquiring masks and using them correctly), engaged in more behaviours to protect themselves, and were less nervous and less anxious about becoming infected with the virus (Luo et al., 2020) .

| CURRENT STUDY

Having a predominant focus on prevention (i.e., being motivated by security) heightens health concerns and fosters health-protective behaviours (Avraham et al., 2016; Ferrer et al., 2017; Fuglestad et al., 2013; Rodrigues et al., 2019 Rodrigues et al., , 2020 Zou & Scholer, 2016) , but at the same time decreases threat concerns (Rodrigues, Lopes, & Carvalho, 2021 ) and helps activate specific behaviours and coping strategies to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic (Luo et al., 2020; Rodrigues, 2021) . We took the opportunity to collect data in an ongoing project on regulatory focus in sexuality and sexual health behaviours. We reasoned that security motives-even if measured in a specific domain (see also Ferrer et al., 2017) -might have help people alleviate some of the consequences of the pandemic on their functioning.We had three main goals with this longitudinal study. First, we aimed to ensure the temporal stability of our regulatory focus in sexuality assessment and the predictive validity of our measure.Scores in the regulatory focus in sexuality measure were expected to correlate before (T1) and after (T2) the pandemic (H1a) and to predict scores in a general measure of regulatory focus after the pandemic (H1b). Second, we aimed to examine if regulatory focus (T1) predicted health outcomes during the COVID-19 pandemic (T2).Specifically, we expected people more focussed on prevention (vs. promotion) to perceive more pandemic-related risks (H2) and to be more worried about contracting COVID-19 (H3). These people should also enact behaviours that allow them to protect their health (H4), experience less anxiety due to the pandemic (H5), and feel more physically healthy (H6). Third, we tested our main hypotheses controlling for perceived life satisfaction before the COVID-19 pandemic and for country of residence. Life satisfaction and well-being have been associated with regulatory focus (e.g., Hanke et al., 2019; Zou et al., 2015) and have been shown to predict health outcomes (e.g., Diener & Chan, 2011; Lawrence et al., 2015; Smyth et al., 2017) .Differences in health policies and government restrictions (Balmford et al., 2020) might have impacted how participants perceived and behaved during the COVID-19 pandemic. Lastly, we explored the possibility that perceived risks, worry about contracting COVID-19, and preventive behaviours were the underlying mechanisms through which people more focussed on prevention experienced less anxiety and more physical health.

| Procedure

We recruited a sample of people residing in the UK and the US through Clickworker in November 2019 (T1). Interested participants were invited to take part in a longitudinal study and were told that this study aimed at understanding people's sexual attitudes and behaviours. To participate, people had to be over the age of 18. At the onset of the study, potential participants were informed about their rights as participants (e.g., confidentiality, anonymity, possibility to withdraw from the study without penalties) and had to provide informed consent (e.g., indicate their agreement to participate) to be enroled in the study. We sent out invitations through Clickworker to participants who completed the survey at T1, to take part in a follow-up study about sexuality in the times of COVID-19 in June 2020 (T2). Only participants that completed both waves of the survey were considered eligible.Participants were asked to report their regulatory focus in sexuality (at T1 and T2), as well as their general regulatory focus, their perceived risk of infection, how worried they were about contracting COVID-19, how frequently they engaged in preventive behaviours, their anxiety related to the pandemic, and their perceived health (all at T2). Additional measures were included for other purposes and will not be discussed further in this paper. At the end of each survey, participants were thanked, debriefed about the general goal of the project, and provided with the contact of the research team if they wanted more information about the research project or its results. Participants received $1.5 (USD) for their participation at each wave. The Ethics Committee at Iscte-Instituto Universitário de Lisboa (#55/2020) approved this study before its initiation.

| Participants

A power analysis using G*Power (Faul et al., 2009) indicated that 158 participants would be needed to estimate a linear regression model with two predictors with medium effect size (f = 0.10) and 95% power. This effect size was based on previous studies examining the associations of regulatory focus in sexuality with health-protective behaviours (e.g., Evans-Paulson et al., 2021; Rodrigues et al., 2020; Rodrigues, Lopes, & Carvalho, 2021) . The online survey was initiated by 406 participants at T1. Of the 384 participants that completed the survey at T1, 165 participated in T2 (attrition rate: 42.97%). Of these, we excluded four participants with more than 10% missing cases in our main measures at T2 (Bennett, 2001) . The final sample included 161 participants (51.6% women) with ages ranging from 18 to 50 years (M = 33.94, SD = 7.54). Participants were living in the UK (50.9%) or the US (49.1%), and most of the participants identified as heterosexuals (76.4%), who were white (74.5%), lived in urban areas (43.5%), and were in the working class (47.8%; see the Electronic Supplemental Material for more details). 

| Perceived risk (T2)

We adapted the measure developed by Napper et al. (2012) to the COVID-19 context. Using 7-point response scales, participants were asked to make cognitive assessments of risk (three items; e.g., 'I think my chances of getting COVID-19 are'; 1 = Zero to 7 = Very large), affective or intuitive assessments of risk (three items; e.g., 'I feel vulnerable to COVID-19 infection'; 1 = None of the time to 7 = All of the time), and the salience of risk (two items; e.g., 'Getting COVID-19 is something I have'; 1 = Never thought about to 7 = Thought about often).All items were mean aggregated into one index (α = 0.82), with higher scores indicating a more perceived risk of COVID-19 infection. RODRIGUES ET AL. 

| Anxiety (T2)

We used the Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale (Spitzer et al., 2006) to assess the frequency with which participants have been suffering from anxiety since the COVID-19 outbreak (seven items; e.g., 'Feeling nervous, anxious, or on edge'). Responses were given on a 4-point scale (0 = Not at all to 3 = Nearly every day). Items were mean aggregated (α = 0.94), with higher scores indicating greater pandemic-related anxiety.

| Perceived physical health (T2)

We used a single-item retrieved from the Short-Form Health Survey (Ware et al., 1996) and asked participants: 'Since the COVID-19 outbreak, how would you rate your physical health'. Responses were given on a 5-point scale (from 1 = Poor to 5 = Excellent), with higher scores indicating greater self-perceived physical health.

| Analytic plan

We computed overall correlations between variables and examined if regulatory focus scores were correlated in both waves (H1). We also conducted preliminary analyses to explore differences in our main predictor variable-regulatory focus-according to sociodemographic variables using correlations and ANOVAs. This allowed us to determine if any covariates should be included in the main analyses. To test our main hypotheses, we computed linear regression models to examine if regulatory focus longitudinally predicted perceived risk of COVID-19 infection (H2), worry about contracting COVID-19 (H3), frequency of preventive behaviours (H4), anxiety due to COVID-19 (H5), and perceived health (H6). All models controlled for perceived life satisfaction at T1 and country of residence, together with any additional covariate identified in the preliminary analyses.We additionally explored the possibility that regulatory focus precited perceptions and behaviours later on, which then helped people cope with the pandemic and consequently increase well-being. We relied on previous research testing mediation models with two-wave longitudinal studies (e.g., Chen et al., 2019; Montoliu et al., 2021) and computed a mediation model using Mplus (Muthén & Muthén, 2012) using the Bayes estimator to account for our small sample size (Asparouhov & Muthén, 2021) . Both prevention focus and promotion focus (at T1) were the predictor variables. Perceived pandemic-related risks, worry about contracting COVID-19, and frequency of preventive behaviours (at T2) were parallel mediators. Anxiety levels and perceived physical health (at T2) were the outcome variables. As in the previous analyses, we controlled for any additional covariates.

| Preliminary analysis

Overall descriptive statistics and correlations between measures are presented in Table 1 

| Longitudinal effects of regulatory focus

We tested the direct effect of regulatory focus on health outcomes with a series of linear regression models and included perceived life satisfaction as a covariate in these models (see Table 2 ). Results showed that people who were more focussed on prevention prior to the COVID-19 pandemic (at T1) perceived greater risk of COVID-19 infection, p = 0.029, were more worried about contracting the virus, p = 0.012, and enacted more preventing behaviours, p < 0.001, after the pandemic was declared (at T2). These people also experienced less pandemic-related anxiety, p = 0.019, and perceived better physical health, p = 0.016, at T2. No significant effects of promotion focus scores on health outcomes were found, all ps ≥ 0.141. 2 These analyses also revealed country differences in two health outcomes. Specifically, participants from the US (vs. the UK) reported more preventive behaviours, p = 0.038, and greater anxiety, p = 0.011, during the COVID-19 pandemic.

| Exploratory analyses

Based on our previous analyses, the exploratory mediation model controlled for country differences in preventive behaviours and anxiety. As shown in Figure 1 , standardized results showed that prevention focus predicted more perceived risks, p < 0.001, more worry about contracting COVID-19, p < 0.001, and higher frequency of preventive behaviours enactment, p < 0.001. Results also showed that perceived risk was associated with higher anxiety, p < 0.001 (indirect effect: β = 0.07, p < 0.001), and less perceived physical 

| DISCUSSION

Past research has shown that individual motivations for security or growth are important to understand health behaviours (Zou & Scholer, 2016) . Some findings have already shown that people more focussed on prevention (vs. promotion) engage in more healthprotective behaviours in different domains (Avraham et al., 2016; Ferrer et al., 2017; Fuglestad et al., 2013; Rodrigues et al., 2019 Rodrigues et al., , 2020 Zou & Scholer, 2016) . At the same time, they are less concerned about infections (Rodrigues, Lopes, & Carvalho, 2021) . Aligned with this, people more motivated to maintain their safety were less anxious and less fearful during the COVID-19 pandemic (Luo et al., 2020; Rodrigues, 2021) . We addressed these apparently contradictory findings by examining if regulatory focus influenced different perceptions and health outcomes during the COVID-19 pandemic. In the current study, we used data from before the COVID-19 pandemic-intended to examine the temporal effects of regulatory focus on sexual behaviour -and built upon those results by assessing different health outcomes during the pandemic. This allowed us to examine the temporal effects of regulatory focus on perceptions (e.g., worry about infection), behaviours (e.g., adhere to social isolation), and psychological symptomatology (e.g., anxiety due to the pandemic).Our findings supported the notion that regulatory focus in sexuality is relatively stable over time (Gödöllei & Beck, 2020) on. This suggests that our predictor variables can also help understand individual functioning and well-being later on, even though scores on both sexuality and general prevention focus were uncorrelated at T2.Our findings also showed that having a predominant focus on prevention (vs. promotion) predicted more risk perceptions, more worry about contracting COVID-19, and more protective behaviours (e.g., washing hands more frequently). This is aligned with other studies showing that being more focussed on prevention (vs. promotion) helps people to enact health-protective behaviours (Avraham et al., 2016; Ferrer et al., 2017; Fuglestad et al., 2013; Rodrigues et al., 2020) , arguably because these people perceive more threats to their health (Rodrigues et al., 2019) . Furthermore, our findings complement recent research showing associations between regulatory focus, fear of COVID-19 infection, and perceived pandemicrelated threats (Rodrigues, 2021; Rodrigues, Balzarini, et al., 2021) .If people more focussed on prevention are more aware of the risks a given context poses to their health, they should activate different coping mechanisms that can help them control health risks and avoid threats, and consequently experience psychological and physical well-being. This can include seeking more objective information about what they need to do to protect their health and have greater control over their behaviours. Aligned with this reasoning, our exploratory mediation analysis showed that having a predominant focus on prevention increased perceived risks related to the pandemic and more worry about infection, which increased anxiety and decreased perceived physical health (only for perceived risk).However, and in contrast with the overall correlations between T2variables, enacting more protective behaviours during the pandemic seemed to have helped individuals more focussed on prevention become less anxious about the pandemic. All things considered, then, these findings show that acting in accordance with one's safety concerns helps people when faced with health threats, and highlight 

| Limitations and future studies

Our findings present novel data by highlighting the crucial role of regulatory focus in health and well-being at the onset of the pandemic. However, these findings should be taken with caution in light of some limitations. Our main predictor variables were focussed on sexuality, which can limit the generalization of our findings because we were unable to control for the effect of general regulatory focus at baseline. Similar to our results, past findings have shown correlations between regulatory focus in specific domains (e.g., health) and general regulatory focus (e.g., Ferrer et al., 2017) . Also, our temporal effects remained the same even after controlling for general regulatory focus at T2. Arguably, we would have observed even stronger effects if we had assessed health or general regulatory focus at baseline. We also acknowledge limitations to our theoretical rationale due to inconsistencies in the measurement of regulatory focus across waves and the lack of correlation between prevention scores assessed at T2. This may be explained by validity or reliability issues associated with the use of singe-item measures used in this wave or, more likely, by changes in the context. Indeed, the onset of the pandemic caused an overall decline in sexual activity (e.g., Lehmiller et al., 2021; Wignall et al., 2021) , suggesting that sexual security goals were not necessarily motivating behaviours when compared to general security goals. Notwithstanding, we must also note that our regression models used T1 measures-assessed before the pandemic-as our predictor variables.We also conducted exploratory mediation analyses with data from a two-wave longitudinal study and found a potential path through which regulatory focus helped people cope with the pandemic-enacting preventive behaviours. Some authors have questioned the adequacy of such analyses with a two-wave study (Cole & Maxwell, 2003) and therefore our findings must be taken with caution. Still, all outcomes were assessed at the second wave, were interdependent of one another, and were highly determined by the context. Building upon these exploratory findings, future studies should seek to replicate our findings with a fully longitudinal design (e.g., a three-wave study), add more complete measures of regulatory focus, disentangle the predictive value of each regulatory focus domain to different health outcomes and health behaviours, and explore the specific contribution of perceptions and behaviours to psychological and physical well-being in health-threatening contexts.We were unable to examine the extent to which local policies and government restrictions specific to each country impacted how par- 

