

Thank you for submitting your manuscript to The EMBO Journal. Three referees have now seen your study and their comments are provide below. I am afraid that the overall opinion is not very positive.While the referees appreciate that the analysis extends previous work, they also find that the advance and insight provided is not sufficient to consider publication here. Both referees #1 and 2 recommend that the analysis would be better suited for publication in the more specialised literature. Referee #3 is more positive, but also find that we gain limited further mechanistic insight into the function of IFITM3.Given these comments from good experts in the field, I am afraid that I can't offer to consider publication here. I thank you for the opportunity to consider this manuscript. I am sorry that we cannot be more positive on this occasion, but I hope nevertheless that you will find our referees' comments helpful.

REFEREE REPORTS

Referee #1:Compton and colleagues have investigated the antiviral role of the predicted truncation that occurs in the rs12252-C polymorphism of IFITM3. This results in the that removal a YxxPhi AP-2 binding endocytosis motif and an overlapping PPxY binding site for HECT Ub ligases. They find that overexpression of this variant increases antiviral activity against HIV-1 in transient expression/induced expression systems and there is and additive affect of truncating the ligase binding site and the endocytosis motif. Interestingly mutations in these sites are present in primate sequences and vary restrictive potency against HIV and flu.The MS is clearly presented. However, in my opinion is falls short of the general interest required for EMBO.Firstly, all the data is the result of transient overexpression of IFITM3 in 293T cells, or induced expression from a Dox-dependent promoter in SupT1 cells. There are several controversies in the field regarding IFITMs and HIV (some of which the authors have addressed), but without a clear demonstration that the polymorphism that results in this truncation leading to enhanced restriction in primary homozygous rs12252 human T cells or in cultured cell via CRISPR knock-in to assure physiological expression levels, the relevance of the observation presented to the pathogenesis of HIV-1 is not clear.Secondly, the effects on localization, neddylation, and IFITM3 stabilization as well as Flu restriction by the mutants characterized have been published by coauthors of this MS before in PLOS Pathogens and J Virol. As such none of the results presented are that surprising or novel.Thirdly, the species specificity is rather under-developed. IFITM2 and IFITM3 occupy partially overlapping cellular localizations. Does the IFITM2 from the species where PPXY variations have accrued in IFITM3 show enhance restrictive potential for Influenza to balance the "antiviral cover". What about IFITM1? How does expression of the other two under natural IFN-induced conditions influence the IFITM3 variants and viral restriction?Referee #2:The manuscript by Compton et al 'Natural mutations in IFITM3 allow escape from post-translational regulation and toggle antiviral specificity', describes how amino acid variation in IFITM3 alters its antiviral properties.The first half of the paper is largely incremental, with most of the mutants of IFITM3, their cellular location and effect on some viruses already described. Whilst interesting these data are not particularly surprising and as such would be better suited to more specialist virology journals. The authors devote a lot of attention to re-assessing many published IFITM3 mutant proteins and its cellular localization, with re-localization to of IFITM3 on the plasma membrane. Although not full assessed for HIV before these are well characterized mutants of IFITM3 and the addition to the knowledge of IFITM3 is marginal. For example the biology of IFOTM3 and NEDD4 in Figure 3 is already known with the effect on HIV-1, being largely predictable.The interesting but fundamentally flawed part of the paper is the analysis of primate IFITM3 genes. The authors mine various databases for IFITM3 genes by BLASTN and BLASTP. From the methods the impression is that only one BLAST hit for IFITM3 would be returned for each primate and is represented in Figure 4A . However, it is well known that the IFITM genes are highly pseudogenized in genomes and paralogous duplicate IFITM3s have been proposed. Therefore simple BLASTN and BLASTP analysis cannot distinguish the true IFITM3 from pseudogenes or paralogs, with the later being more interesting. The only reliable means to identify IFITM3 is to map it within the locus defined by IFITM1, 2 and 5 flanked by two genes B4GALNT4 and ATLH1. Therefore it is very likely that the authors are analyzing pseudogenes in Figure 4 .This flaw is further exmplified by the fact that there are 3 Gorilla, 2 Baboon and 6 Marmoset IFITM3 alleles, more paralogs than have been observed in all human sequences.. It is well known that pseudogenes are not constrained during genome replication with respect to function altering mutations; however, to date there is not indication if the high level of IFITM pseudogenization has functional properties. The authors address this a little by suggesting gene duplication has occurred however, they do not go on to demonstrate that these IFITM3 are within the IFITM locus compared to pseudogenes.It is unclear if the sequences from 6 different marmoset and 3 different Gorilla's are from the same genome files or samples. It is plausible that the PPNYEMLK sequence present in humans, chimps, gorillas, baboons and marmosets is the true IFITM3 sequence and the rest are pseuodgenes. The phylogeny as described as 'indicative of descent from a single gene' (line 259) can equally apply to pseudgenes within a species.However, not all sequences are present on the Figure 4 tree. Where are Gorilla 2 and 3 on the tree? Judging by the number of amino acid changes in Gorilla sequence Gorilla_XM_004029280.1, including a large C terminal insertion, it is hard to imagine it would follow the species tree in Fig  4A. Finally I disagree with the sentence (line 389-390), 'suggesting that virus restriction activities represent an ancient and long-preserved function of these proteins', It is plausible that a cell intrinsic function of an ancestral IFITM was select by duplication for an emergent antiviral property. The question remains that for bacteria, where lipid enveloped bacteriophages are not known, what was the cellular role of IFITM proteins such as those found in Mycobacterium. Minor points 1. Figure 1 . Del21 appears smaller than full length but why is the Del-palm smaller? 2. Why does Del Y20 run significantly higher than WT IFITM3 (and del 21)( fig 1I) -where does delY20 localize -would assume plasma membrane as published but would be good to see. 3 . Unclear if these different primate IFITMs are having other biological effects, for example the Colobus Del22-24 in Figure 5B appear to be a membrane around three distinct nuclei.Referee #3:In this study, Compton et al. describe how the subcellular localisation of IFITM3 affects its antiviral restriction activity. They identify specific residues in the N-term domain that are critical for endosomal accumulation of IFITM3, pinpointing to phosphorylation of Y20 as the key element. The authors show that residues around Y20 are important for NEDD4 mediated ubiquitination of IFITM3, which regulates its abundance. Aberrant localisation of IFITM3 to the plasma membrane due to changes at or around Y20 results in greater incorporation of the protein into HIV-1 particles and greater restriction of infection, a phenotype maintained in CD4+ T cells. Conversely, less abundant IFITM3 mutants are less restrictive of HIV-1. Next, the authors examine IFITM3 sequences in several primate species and detect substitutions in the critical N-term domain. They test such IFITM3 variants and find that some of them are defective for ubiquitination or endosomal localization and this correlates with HIV-1 restriction. Interestingly, due to their localisation at the plasma membrane, IFITM3 variants with potent HIV-1 restriction have weak flu restriction. The authors speculate that divergent evolutionary pressures might have caused IFITM3 species-specific variations at the N-term region to counteract different viral infections. IFITM3 has recently been described as a novel, early-acting restriction factor so little is know about its mechanism of action. A polymorphism at the N-term of human IFITM3 was proposed to be a determinant of severe flu, suggesting that IFITM3 is actually important in vivo. This study provides important new information on the function of IFITM3 and hints at the possibility of species-specific evolution caused by viral infections. The study, however, does not address the actual mechanism of action of IFITM3, which remains rather elusive. Nonetheless the study is intriguing and well performed.Main issues:1. Parts of Figure 4 are difficult to follow. a) In panel D (top), mutant Δ22-24 has no IFITM3 band at 30kDa yet seemingly has the two correctly Ubiquitinated bands (marked with 2 or 3 asterisks). b) It is not clear if the IFITM3 variants analysed are human (mutated) or primates. c) Mutant P17L is puzzling: it is endosomal, it is susceptible to NEDD4 ubiquitination yet is more potent than wild type human IFITM3 (see also Figure 5C ).2. Given the importance of the primate variants for this study, I would strongly recommend that the authors reverse the changes to make such primate IFITM3s similar to the human wild type version and test their anti-viral phenotype. This will formally confirm that their different phenotype is caused by the specific changes.Minor issues:1. Figure 2D : it would be helpful to show the confocal images for L23Q 2. Lines 351-358 imply a two step purification protocol; a density gradient purification (line 352) and "an additional high-speed ultracentrifugation step" but it is unclear if this was done through a sucrose cushion or it was simply a centrifugation step.Referee #1:I have reviewed a previous version of this manuscript for EMBO J. The current paper is much improved, making an interesting case for the intriguing evolutionary pattern of IFITM3 in primates.The proposed idea, that IFITM3 variants with different ability to localise at the plasma membrane or in endosomes have evolved to counteract different viruses is plausible and overall supported by the data.I have two recommendations:1. line 197 and Fig EV2D: the images show little co-localisation between IFITM3 and LAMP1 hence lysosomal degradation is unlikely. The clusters in the figure look more like endosomes or MVBs. This issue is not central to the paper, so removing the sentence will suffice.2. Figure 5B . It is now clear why the IFITM3 bands cannot be detected along with the Ub bands in the top panel. However the ubiquitinated bands should be detected by the anti-FLAG antibody. Thus it would be better to remove the low-exposed middle panel, which adds little, and instead show the full blot for the anti-FLAG antibody.Referee #2:The revised MS from Compton et al has made a much stronger case for the evolutionary aspects of the IFITM locus and this result is an important observation.I still have some reservations over the antiviral potency of mutants. The problem in the field that most likely accounts for the discrepancies in antiviral mechanism from the recent high profile papers from these authors and others is the use use of transient overexpression. The problem with this technique is of course that expression is not uniform across the culture, with a small proportion of cells making the majority of virus and protein. This should at least be acknowledged. However, given the authors' argument on this issue, they need to demonstrate, at least in the human system, that their expression levels are comparable to IFN induction in the same cells that they are using.1st Revision -authors' response 08 July 2016Thank you for your email dated June 30, in which you related your decision regarding our manuscript entitled "Natural mutations in IFITM3 modulate post-translational regulation and toggle antiviral specificity." (EMBOR-2016-42771V1)We have now addressed the remaining reviewers' comments and modified the manuscript accordingly. We have also shortened the title to follow your recommendation.Referee #1:I have reviewed a previous version of this manuscript for EMBO J. The current paper is much improved, making an interesting case for the intriguing evolutionary pattern of IFITM3 in primates. The proposed idea, that IFITM3 variants with different ability to localise at the plasma membrane or in endosomes have evolved to counteract different viruses is plausible and overall supported by the data.I have two recommendations:1. line 197 and Fig EV2D: the images show little co-localisation between IFITM3 and LAMP1 hence lysosomal degradation is unlikely. The clusters in the figure look more like endosomes or MVBs. This issue is not central to the paper, so removing the sentence will suffice.We thank the reviewer for this suggestion. We have removed the end of the sentence at line 199 so that it now reads « NEDD4 induced the accumulation of IFITM3 in large vesicular compartments that partially colocalize with LAMP1. » 2. Figure 5B . It is now clear why the IFITM3 bands cannot be detected along with the Ub bands in the top panel. However the ubiquitinated bands should be detected by the anti-FLAG antibody. Thus it would be better to remove the low-exposed middle panel, which adds little, and instead show the full blot for the anti-FLAG antibody.We have updated Figure 5 by removing the low-exposed middle panel, as requested. We agree that showing the full blot for the anti-FLAG antibody would have been a simple solution. Unfortunately, the ubiquitinated forms of IFITM3 are not detectable by the anti-FLAG antibody. This is because 1) the FLAG detection requires an anti-mouse secondary antibody, which interacts strongly with the light and heavy chains of the antibody-coupled beads used to perform immunoprecipitations, preventing the detection of ubiquitinated forms in the same area of the membrane and 2) the FLAG antibody has lower affinity than the IFITM3-specific antibody. Thus, the IFITM3-specific antibody, produced in rabbit, proved to be more useful to this end. The relatively smaller panel with the FLAG antibody is still shown because it shows comparable immunoprecipitation was achieved using FLAG-coupled beads. The Figure 5 is nonetheless clearer and more concise, and former Fig 5D  ( showing stable expression levels in 293T cell lines) has now been moved to Fig EV5. Referee #2:The revised MS from Compton et al has made a much stronger case for the evolutionary aspects of the IFITM locus and this result is an important observation.I still have some reservations over the antiviral potency of mutants. The problem in the field that most likely accounts for the discrepancies in antiviral mechanism from the recent high profile papers from these authors and others is the use use of transient overexpression. The problem with this technique is of course that expression is not uniform across the culture, with a small proportion of cells making the majority of virus and protein. This should at least be acknowledged. However, given the authors' argument on this issue, they need to demonstrate, at least in the human system, that their expression levels are comparable to IFN induction in the same cells that they are using.We thank the reviewer for their kind comments and for raising an important point regarding uniformity of expression following transient overexpression. We have now added a new element to Fig EV1 which shows a comparison of transient overexpression with induction by type-I interferon.We show that transient transfection results in expression of IFITM3 that is comparable to (but less uniform than) interferon treatment of 293T cells. We also include data for our Dox-inducible SupT1 cell system, whereby we compare levels of IFITM3 induced by Dox to those induced by type-I interferon in primary CD4+ T cells.We have made the following changes to the text : Line 137 : « Transfection of FLAG-tagged IFITM3 into 293T results in expression levels comparable to, but less uniform than, those induced by type-I interferon… » Line 211 : « Following Dox treatment of these cells, expression levels are uniform and full-length IFITM3 localizes mostly to the cell interior while the 1-21 variant is predominantly found at the surface. »In addition to the changes listed above, we also swapped Fig 3A and 3B for clarity.2nd Editorial Decision 02 August 2016Thank you for the submission of your revised manuscript to our editorial offices. We have now received the enclosed report on it. As you will see, the referee now finds the manuscript suitable for publication in EMBO reports. Before we can proceed with the formal acceptance of your 1. Data the data were obtained and processed according to the field's best practice and are presented to reflect the results of the experiments in an accurate and unbiased manner. figure panels include only data points, measurements or observations that can be compared to each other in a scientifically meaningful way. graphs include clearly labeled error bars for independent experiments and sample sizes. Unless justified, error bars should not be shown for technical replicates. if n< 5, the individual data points from each experiment should be plotted and any statistical test employed should be justified Please fill out these boxes ê (Do not worry if you cannot see all your text once you press return) a specification of the experimental system investigated (eg cell line, species name).

Transfer to EMBO reports 24 May 2016

Thanks for your letter. As discussed with Karin Dumstrei [from The EMBO Journal], we would invite a submission of your paper to EMBO reports in the future, if you can address the concerns of the referees in a timely manner (and maybe obtain data that would considerably strengthen the study). Please note that if you were to send a new manuscript this would be treated as a new submission rather than a revision and would be editorially assessed and, in case, reviewed afresh (most likely by the same referees -taking into account that it is then submitted to EMBO reports), also with respect to the literature and the novelty of your findings at the time of resubmission.I think the first part of the paper could be shortened, whereas the primate part needs to be substantiated by further data, addressing also in detail the concerns of referee 1# (third point) and referee #2 (especially regarding pseudogenes). Ideally, you could proof that the respective proteins really exist (are expressed) in these species. When you re-submit, please mention our conversation in your letter to the editor, as the manuscript might be taken care of by another editor then.

AUTHOR'S RESONSE

Please find attached a revised version of our manuscript for submission to EMBO Reports entitled "Natural mutations in IFITM3 allow escape from post-translational regulation and toggle antiviral specificity." A former version of the manuscript was submitted to EMBO Journal (EMBOJ-2016-94414), but was not accepted after external review. Following a discussion with Achim Breiling, editor at EMBO Reports, we have extensively revised the manuscript, adding novel results, reorganizing the figures, and we have addressed all of the reviewers' comments.We believe that this submission will be of great interest to EMBO Reports readers because we use a multifaceted experimental approach that converges on virology, evolutionary biology, and cell biology. In effect, this study addresses the basis for host susceptibility to virus infection and the evolutionary dynamics of an important host-pathogen interface.We previously demonstrated that interferon-induced transmembrane (IFITM) proteins, which are broad-spectrum antiviral factors that inhibit the entry of diverse viruses into host cells, can also incorporate directly into HIV-1 virions and interfere with virus-cell fusion (Compton et al. Cell Host & Microbe 2014). In this submission, we provide an advance in our understanding of the mechanisms driving this activity and how it is regulated by the host cell. Our evolutionary findings also provide functional evidence that may explain why gene duplication events are rampant among IFITM members and other families of antiviral genes. The main points of interest shown here are:• Amino-terminal mutants of IFITM3, including one linked to a human polymorphism, result in enhanced incorporation into HIV-1 virions and enhanced inhibition of virus-cell fusion • Two adjacent regulatory motifs that control IFITM3 ubiquitination and endocytosis are responsible for this differential antiviral activity • We provide an extensive and novel analysis of IFITM gene evolution in primates, identifying recurrent gene duplication and divergence of IFITM3 • Functional tests of IFITM3 mutations from non-human primate species suggest that sequence divergence over evolutionary time allows escape from ubiquitination and/or endocytosis • Natural mutations in primate IFITM3 impose a protective trade-off, as mutations that enhance activity against HIV-1 come with a loss of function against Influenza A virus Thank you for considering our manuscript and we hope you find it suitable for EMBO Reports.

POINT-BY-POINT RESPONSE

Editor's suggestions (Achim Breiling)I think the first part of the paper could be shortened, whereas the primate part needs to be substantiated by further data, addressing also in detail the concerns of referee 1# (third point) and referee #2 (especially regarding pseudogenes). Ideally, you could proof that the respective proteins really exist (are expressed) in these species.We thank the editor for his suggestions. We have extensively modified the manuscript as suggested.We Firstly, all the data is the result of transient overexpression of IFITM3 in 293T cells, or induced expression from a Dox-dependent promoter in SupT1 cells.We thank Reviewer #1 for his/her comments. We believe that using 293T cells or SupT1 cells is not necessarily a fundamental experimental flaw or limitation, as we are studying interferon-induced genes. Knockdown of endogenous IFITM proteins is already known to have functional consequences for HIV and other virus infections (published results from our laboratory and others, refs 20-22). However, using 293T cells and SupT1 cells, we can « mimic » natural IFITM protein levels because IFITM3 protein is virtually absent from these cells at basal levels and it can be interferon induced. By substituting interferon treatment with low doses of plasmid encoding our gene (and mutants) of interest, we can analyze their functions in a controlled setting.There are several controversies in the field regarding IFITMs and HIV (some of which the authors have addressed), but without a clear demonstration that the polymorphism that results in this truncation leading to enhanced restriction in primary homozygous rs12252 human T cells or in cultured cell via CRISPR knock-in to assure physiological expression levels, the relevance of the observation presented to the pathogenesis of HIV-1 is not clear.We fully agree that the relevance of the rs12252 polymorphism in HIV-1 infection remains unclear, but this was not a focus of this manuscript. The Δ1-21 mutant, as well as the other artificial mutations studied here, was used as a tool to learn more about the mechanisms by which IFITM3 inhibits HIV-1. The experiments using expression of IFITM3 in cell lines serves as an introduction to our more novel results studying IFITM gene sequences found in primate genomes. To emphasize the most novel/interesting aspects of the paper, we have included new genomic analyses that reveal new insight into the evolution of the IFITM family (and we condensed the less novel parts). For example, we found naturally occurring (genome-encoded) truncations of IFITM3 in non-human primate species that closely resemble the Δ1-21 « artificial » construct.We have modified the text to highlight novelty and to reduce redundancy for readers.Secondly, the effects on localization, neddylation, and IFITM3 stabilization as well as Flu restriction by the mutants characterized have been published by coauthors of this MS before in PLOS Pathogens and J Virol. As such none of the results presented are that surprising or novel.Our objective was to examine how cellular factors like NEDD4 and AP-2 may impact the function of IFITM3 against HIV in cell culture systems (which is a novel finding, with antiviral effects opposite to those observed with Flu for some of the IFITM3 mutants), but we also address their in vivo relevance with our updated evolutionary analysis. This requires an approach that combines genomic analyses with wet functional experiments. While the localization results you are referring to may not be very surprising on their own, these experiments form an essential basis for what follows in the manuscript. We have changed the text and the figure layout to underline that they provide the experimental framework to introduce our evolutionary data.Thirdly, the species specificity is rather under-developed. IFITM2 and IFITM3 occupy partially overlapping cellular localizations. Does the IFITM2 from the species where PPXY variations have accrued in IFITM3 show enhance restrictive potential for Influenza to balance the "antiviral cover". What about IFITM1? How does expression of the other two under natural IFN-induced conditions influence the IFITM3 variants and viral restriction?We agree that this part of the manuscript was under-developed, and we thank the reviewers for inspiring us to make dramatic improvements. We believe our results point exactly to what you are suggesting-that the repeated duplication and divergence of IFITM genes may add to the « antiviral coverage » for a given host species. This is an important point, and we have now added to the Abstract. We have included new data showing that some primate species encode multiple IFITM3 genes which, together, may allow for simultaneous restriction of viruses at different cell compartments (HIV and IAV, for example). We also highlight that IFITM2 is a recent genetic innovation present only in Humans, Chimps, and Gorillas. IFITM1 is present in a few additional species, but it is not ubiquitous. Furthermore, we include data showing that IFITM1 is not an efficient inhibitor of viruses entering late endosomes (Influenza). Thus, while IFITM2 and IFITM1 may provide balance to the antiviral coverage of human cells, this doesn't seem to be the case in other species. A surprising finding is that IFITM3 is the oldest antiviral IFITM family member and that it has proliferated to multiple copies in many different species. Indeed, we believe that this is likely the result of increasing the antiviral coverage of the cell, and it is analogous to the recent duplication of IFITM3 to form IFITM2 in human ancestors. These novel findings are now presented in the new Figures 3-5 and EV4-5.Referee #2:The manuscript by Compton et al 'Natural mutations in IFITM3 allow escape from post-translational regulation and toggle antiviral specificity', describes how amino acid variation in IFITM3 alters its antiviral properties.The first half of the paper is largely incremental, with most of the mutants of IFITM3, their cellular location and effect on some viruses already described. Whilst interesting these data are not particularly surprising and as such would be better suited to more specialist virology journals. The authors devote a lot of attention to re-assessing many published IFITM3 mutant proteins and its cellular localization, with re-localization to of IFITM3 on the plasma membrane. Although not full assessed for HIV before these are well characterized mutants of IFITM3 and the addition to the knowledge of IFITM3 is marginal. For example the biology of IFITM3 and NEDD4 in Figure 3 is already known with the effect on HIV-1, being largely predictable.See above comments-these predictable pieces of data now take the back seat of the manuscript.The interesting but fundamentally flawed part of the paper is the analysis of primate IFITM3 genes. The authors mine various databases for IFITM3 genes by BLASTN and BLASTP. From the methods the impression is that only one BLAST hit for IFITM3 would be returned for each primate and is represented in Figure 4A . However, it is well known that the IFITM genes are highly pseudogenized in genomes and paralogous duplicate IFITM3s have been proposed. Therefore simple BLASTN and BLASTP analysis cannot distinguish the true IFITM3 from pseudogenes or paralogs, with the later being more interesting. The only reliable means to identify IFITM3 is to map it within the locus defined by IFITM1, 2 and 5 flanked by two genes B4GALNT4 and ATLH1. Therefore it is very likely that the authors are analyzing pseudogenes in Figure 4 .Because of these well-deserved criticisms, we have performed a complete overhaul of our genomic analyses. Our sequence retrieval and presentation is not based on BLAST results, but rather comparative genomics using fully sequenced reference genomes from a panel of primate species. To address the reviewer's concerns about possible pseudogenes, we have excluded any sequence that is annotated as a pseudogene or any sequence that resembles a pseudogene in any way. Each sequence derived from the Ensembl database represents an open reading frame and is annotated as proteincoding. While this annotation is not strictly based on experimental evidence for protein production, the sequences do not exhibit characteristics used to define pseudogenes. For example, they do not encode premature stop codons and they retain a high level of sequence similarity to IFITM3 in humans. Furthermore, our phylogenetic analysis proved essential because it showed that certain "non-canonical" IFITM3 genes are conserved in multiple species, allowing us to date their origins and suggesting that they have been selectively maintained (results presented in the novel Figure 4 and Figure EV4 ). If these genes were pseudogenes by definition, genetic drift would lead to signs of decay in this signal, and by definition, gene inactivation would occur. Naturally, we cannot prove that each and every sequence here can give rise to protein. However, the sequences selected for in depth study exhibit a high degree of similarity to Human IFITM3 on the protein level. Finally, we have supplemented our genomic analysis to include IFITM3 orthologs in additional Strepsirrhine primates which allowed us to reveal the primitive state of the IFITM locus (Figures 3 and 4) . In these species, only IFITM3 and IFITM5 are found in the canonical locus (flanked by B4GALNT4 and ATLH1), and moreover, duplication in IFITM3 has led to two adjacent IFITM3 genes in this locus, with one copy exhibiting mutations in the NEDD4 and/or AP-2 binding sites. RNA-seq data from NCBI also show that these genes are expressed. Thus, the mutations we chose to analyze in functional experiments are identical to or similar to naturally occuring mutations identified in IFITM3 genes, whether they be located in the canonical IFITM locus or elsewhere in the genome. We hope that this combined set of novel analyses addresses the important question raised by the reviewer.This flaw is further exemplified by the fact that there are 3 Gorilla, 2 Baboon and 6 Marmoset IFITM3 alleles, more paralogs than have been observed in all human sequences. It is well known that pseudogenes are not constrained during genome replication with respect to function altering mutations; however, to date there is not indication if the high level of IFITM pseudogenization has functional properties. The authors address this a little by suggesting gene duplication has occurred however, they do not go on to demonstrate that these IFITM3 are within the IFITM locus compared to pseudogenes.As suggested by the reviewer, we have now added Figure 3 in which we identify that duplication of IFITM3 has occurred in the IFITM locus of three Strepsirrhine species. This strongly suggests that we should not expect the same number of IFITM genes in the IFITM locus of different species.Furthermore, we respectfully disagree that a gene must be a pseudogene if it falls outside of the « expected » locus. For example, IFITM10 is located on the same chromosome as the other IFITM genes, but not in its immediate vicinity. That doesn't mean that IFITM10 is a pseudogene or that it has no functional importance to the organism.It is unclear if the sequences from 6 different marmoset and 3 different Gorilla's are from the same genome files or samples. It is plausible that the PPNYEMLK sequence present in humans, chimps, gorillas, baboons and marmosets is the true IFITM3 sequence and the rest are pseuodgenes. The phylogeny as described as 'indicative of descent from a single gene' (line 259) can equally apply to pseudgenes within a species.Sequences obtained from a given species were obtained from a single representative of that species (known as the reference genome sequence). This is now specified in the Materials and Methods section. We have provided comprehensive phylogenetic analysis in this revised manuscript based on the entirety of the IFITM gene family in the Ensembl database ( Figure 4B and Figure EV4A ). We agree that « descent from a single gene » can apply to functional genes as well as pseudogenes, but as stated above, we have no reason to suspect that any of these sequences are pseudogenes. For the sake of clarity, we have removed the statement 'indicative of descent from a single gene' as it was shown. The phylogenies are now described and discussed in the new section accompanying Figures 3 and 4 , pages 11-13.However, not all sequences are present on the Figure 4 tree. Where are Gorilla 2 and 3 on the tree? Judging by the number of amino acid changes in Gorilla sequence Gorilla_XM_004029280.1, including a large C terminal insertion, it is hard to imagine it would follow the species tree in Fig  4A. We have updated the phylogenetic analysis to which you refer, which now appears in Figure 4B and Figure EV4A ) and highlights the relationship among IFITM3 sequences in this study. As discussed in the text (line 315), some sequences (such as the gorilla sequences you mention) are "outliers" with regards to the expected species tree. This updated analysis shows that, even though these sequences show differences compared to human IFITM3, they appear in multiple species and thus represent remnants of an ancient IFITM3 gene that must have emerged in simian ancestors. Additionally, we believe that deviations between a gene tree and a species tree are not problematic, but rather interesting, as they indicate selective forces have likely been at play.Finally I disagree with the sentence (line 389-390), 'suggesting that virus restriction activities represent an ancient and long-preserved function of these proteins', It is plausible that a cell intrinsic function of an ancestral IFITM was select by duplication for an emergent antiviral property. The question remains that for bacteria, where lipid enveloped bacteriophages are not known, what was the cellular role of IFITM proteins such as those found in Mycobacterium.We agree that this statement is preliminary. We have thus modified the sentence which now reads: "To date, all immune-related IFITM proteins identified in animals (metazoans) display antiviral function (4-6). Even IFITM-like genes in Mycobacteria inhibit virus infection when expressed in human cells (7) ."Minor points 1. Figure 1 . Del21 appears smaller than full length but why is the Del-palm smaller?The Δpalm mutant most likely runs smaller because it lacks three cysteine residues, and may have altered conformation/detergent binding compared to WT protein. It is worth mentioning that migration patterns of different mutants of IFITM3 are not readily detectable unless using a 12% acylamide SDS-PAGE gel (as we used here).2. Why does Del Y20 run significantly higher than WT IFITM3 (and del 21) (fig 1I) -where does delY20 localize -would assume plasma membrane as published but would be good to see.The ΔY20 mutant is known to run significantly higher than WT IFITM3 (ref 15). The question « Why ? » is a good one but most likely involves changes to the linear polypeptide conformation or detergent binding properties, one that does not only take into account the total number of amino acids present. We have now included a confocal fluorescence image (Fig EV1) to confirm the surface localization of this mutant.3. Unclear if these different primate IFITMs are having other biological effects, for example the Colobus Del22-24 in Figure 5B appear to be a membrane around three distinct nuclei.The « three distinct nuclei » were actually a single nucleus in a different slice of the same cell. We have replaced this image with another example for clarity, which now appears in Figure EV5 .Referee #3:In this study, Compton et al. describe how the subcellular localisation of IFITM3 affects its antiviral restriction activity. They identify specific residues in the N-term domain that are critical for endosomal accumulation of IFITM3, pinpointing to phosphorylation of Y20 as the key element. The authors show that residues around Y20 are important for NEDD4 mediated ubiquitination of IFITM3, which regulates its abundance. Aberrant localisation of IFITM3 to the plasma membrane due to changes at or around Y20 results in greater incorporation of the protein into HIV-1 particles and greater restriction of infection, a phenotype maintained in CD4+ T cells. Conversely, less abundant IFITM3 mutants are less restrictive of HIV-1. Next, the authors examine IFITM3 sequences in several primate species and detect substitutions in the critical N-term domain. They test such IFITM3 variants and find that some of them are defective for ubiquitination or endosomal localization and this correlates with HIV-1 restriction. Interestingly, due to their localisation at the plasma membrane, IFITM3 variants with potent HIV-1 restriction have weak flu restriction. The authors speculate that divergent evolutionary pressures might have caused IFITM3 species-specific variations at the N-term region to counteract different viral infections.IFITM3 has recently been described as a novel, early-acting restriction factor so little is know about its mechanism of action. A polymorphism at the N-term of human IFITM3 was proposed to be a determinant of severe flu, suggesting that IFITM3 is actually important in vivo. This study provides important new information on the function of IFITM3 and hints at the possibility of species-specific evolution caused by viral infections. The study, however, does not address the actual mechanism of action of IFITM3, which remains rather elusive. Nonetheless the study is intriguing and well performed.We thank reviewer #3 for her/his positive comments. We believe that we have touched on the mechanism of action of IFITM3 is this manuscript. In Figure 2 , we display our results using an inducible T cell line. Here, we find that IFITM3 expression does not result in decreased expression of HIV-1 Envelope protein in infected cells, as was suggested by a recent paper in Cell Reports (ref 22). Since we show that IFITM3 is highly restrictive to HIV in these cells (CD4+ T cells, the natural targets of HIV-1 in vivo), this is an important finding for the field.Main issues:1. Parts of Figure 4 are difficult to follow. a) In panel D (top), mutant Δ22-24 has no IFITM3 band at 30kDa yet seemingly has the two correctly Ubiquitinated bands (marked with 2 or 3 asterisks). b) It is not clear if the IFITM3 variants analysed are human (mutated) or primates. c) Mutant P17L is puzzling: it is endosomal, it is susceptible to NEDD4 ubiquitination yet is more potent than wild type human IFITM3 (see also Figure 5C ).We have provided a new Figure 5 (former Fig 4) containing these results to facilitate the reading.A) The band you are referring to at ˜30 kDa (as well as the 15 kDa for unmodified IFITM3) using the anti-IFITM3 antibody is not visible for the Δ22-24 mutant because this antibody does not detect this mutant form (showing us that its epitope specificity falls precisely where the mutation is). This is now clearly specified in the text (line 348). For this reason, the FLAG antibody serves to identify the immunoprecipitated IFITM3 protein in each condition. B) In all cases, the IFITM3 variants analyzed consist of mutations introduced into the Human IFITM3 background. This was done in order to isolate the individual impact of single mutations on IFITM3 function. We also tested the « native » full-length sequence of IFITM3 in the Colobus monkey to understand how mutations may impact function within the natural context of the species-specific gene. C) We actually show that the P17L mutant, while endosomal, is less susceptible to NEDD4 ubiquitination. As a result, and consistent with the results of our artificial mutant Δ17-18, it exhhibits slightly more potent anti-HIV activity than IFITM3 WT.3. Given the importance of the primate variants for this study, I would strongly recommend that the authors reverse the changes to make such primate IFITM3s similar to the human wild type version and test their anti-viral phenotype. This will formally confirm that their different phenotype is caused by the specific changes.We believe that our experiments using the Colobus IFITM3 sequence (described above) fulfill this demand. The full-length Colobus IFITM3 sequence exhibits the same subcellular localization and antiviral activity as a human IFITM3 mutated at Δ22-24, strongly suggesting that it is these residues that govern changes observed in localization and activity.Minor issues:1. Figure 2D : it would be helpful to show the confocal images for L23Q.This image now appears in Figure EV1 .2. Lines 351-358 imply a two step purification protocol; a density gradient purification (line 352) and "an additional high-speed ultracentrifugation step" but it is unclear if this was done through a sucrose cushion or it was simply a centrifugation step.This line has been removed, as it referred to an experimental result that was not included in the final version of the manuscript. Thank you for pointing this out. Thank you for the submission of your research manuscript to EMBO reports. I apologise again for the delay in handling your manuscript. We have received reports from two referees that were asked to evaluate your study, which can be found at the end of this email. Both have previously also assessed your submission to The EMBO journal.As you will see, both referees acknowledge the interest of the findings and support publication of the study. However, both have raised few further concerns that I ask you to fully address in a final revised version of the manuscript. In particular the point of referee #2 regarding the levels of overexpression is of importance.Revised manuscripts should be submitted within three months of a request for revision; they will otherwise be treated as new submissions. Please contact us if a 3-months time frame is not sufficient for the revisions so that we can discuss the revisions further. In this case, I think, revision should be much faster.We now strongly encourage the publication of original source data with the aim of making primary data more accessible and transparent to the reader. The source data will be published in a separate source data file online along with the accepted manuscript and will be linked to the relevant figure.If you would like to use this opportunity, please submit the source data (for example scans of entire gels or blots, data points of graphs in an excel sheet, additional images, etc.) of your key experiments together with the revised manuscript. Please include size markers for scans of entire gels, label the scans with figure and panel number, and send one PDF file per figure or per figure panel.I look forward to seeing a revised version of your manuscript when it is ready. Please let me know if you have questions or comments regarding the revision.

B--Statistics and general methods

the assay(s) and method(s) used to carry out the reported observations and measurements an explicit mention of the biological and chemical entity(ies) that are being measured. an explicit mention of the biological and chemical entity(ies) that are altered/varied/perturbed in a controlled manner.the exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a number, not a range; a description of the sample collection allowing the reader to understand whether the samples represent technical or biological replicates (including how many animals, litters, cultures, etc.).Each figure caption should contain the following information, for each panel where they are relevant:

Captions

The data shown in figures should satisfy the following conditions:Source Data should be included to report the data underlying graphs. Please follow the guidelines set out in the author ship guidelines on Data Presentation. a statement of how many times the experiment shown was independently replicated in the laboratory.Any descriptions too long for the figure legend should be included in the methods section and/or with the source data.Please ensure that the answers to the following questions are reported in the manuscript itself. We encourage you to include a specific subsection in the methods section for statistics, reagents, animal models and human subjects.In the pink boxes below, provide the page number(s) of the manuscript draft or figure legend(s) where the information can be located. Every question should be answered. If the question is not relevant to your research, please write NA (non applicable).

Reporting Checklist For Life Sciences Articles (Rev. July 2015)

This checklist is used to ensure good reporting standards and to improve the reproducibility of published results. These guidelines are consistent with the Principles and Guidelines for Reporting Preclinical Research issued by the NIH in 2014. Please follow the journal's authorship guidelines in preparing your manuscript.

