Introduction

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is an enveloped virus responsible for the respiratory tract disease Coronavirus disease 2019 (El-Sayed et al., 2021a; Yao et al., 2020) . In December 2019, the first human infection with and subsequent isolation of the enveloped SARS-CoV-2 virus was reported in Wuhan, China (Zhou et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2020) . Since then, the virus has spread to every corner of the world to cause a public health disaster. As of June 30, 2021, over 180 million cases of COVID-19 have been reported, and more than 3.9 million lives claimed worldwide (https://covid19.who.int/). Due to its fast spread and high mortality rate, scientists have worked on all fronts to characterize the virus (El-Sayed and Kamel, 2021; Harrison et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2020) and reported clinical symptoms associated with the viral disease (El-Sayed et al., 2021a , 2021b .COVID-19 has witnessed multiple ways of spreading the virus to humans (Harrison et al., 6 not be neglected as a risk factor (Kratzel et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2020) . It is also not unusual to see news reporting that some foods and their packing bags have been found nucleic acid positive for SARS-CoV-2 and raised suspicions on food safety. Therefore, there is a question to be answered: whether the PCR positive samples are infectious or not?Commonly used methods, such as viral RNA-mediated RT-qPCR assays (Monteil et al., 2020) and protein-mediated immunoassays (Ou et al., 2020) , cannot distinguish viable from dead viruses. Traditional methods based on cell culture, such as virus-induced plaques (Runfeng et al., 2020) or determining tissue culture infectious dose fifty (TCID 50 ) (Manenti et al., 2020; Puente et al., 2020) are gold standards for evaluating viral infectivity, but time-consuming and in need of biosafety level 3 (BSL-3) and above laboratories. It is expensive and non-practical to send every PCR-positive samples to BSL-3 laboratories to verify if the samples contain infectious virions by cell culture. Therefore, there is still an unmet need for rapid and convenient differentiation of infectious and inactive viruses for better control of the transmission of SARS-CoV-2. Recently, viability markers, such as monoazide dyes, have been added to the qPCR-based method to determine the infectivity of disease-causing pathogens including coronaviruses (Puente et al., 2020) . Additionally, it has also been shown that the activity of these novel assays can be improved by coupling them with surfactants especially when the pathogens contain integral membranes (Coudray-Meunier et al., 2013; Dong et al., 2019 Dong et al., , 2018 Puente et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2019) . These assays have been used in the prevention and control of infectious disease outbreaks with vast applications ranging from J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f Journal Pre-proof environmental surveillance, to food and feed safety (Puente et al., 2020) .In the present study, we report an SDS-propidium monoazide (PMA)-assisted RT-qPCR assay that facilitates rapid determination of infectious or live SARS-CoV-2 virions in PCR-positive samples. PMA is an azide derivative that is permeable in membrane-compromised dead viral and bacterial cells and preferentially binds to double-stranded nucleic acid (Golpayegani et al., 2019) . It covalently reacts with DNA/RNA upon radiation by UV light and the PMA-DNA/RNA conjugates could block PCR amplification. SDS (sodium dodecyl sulfate) is a modest membrane-destabilizing agent that improves the permeability of PMA through the membranes of dead cells but does not affect the living cells (Dong et al., 2018; Takahashi et al., 2017) . Based on these principles, the SDS-PMA assisted RT-qPCR assay established here could rapidly differentiate infectious SARS-CoV-2 virions in PCR-positive samples (Fig. 1A ). and aliquots were then stored at -80 C.

Viral stock preparation and plaque assay

The titer of harvested SARS-CoV-2 was further determined by the plaque assay. One day before the experiment, Vero E6 cells were seeded in a 24-well plate at a concentration of 1×10 5 cells/well. Culture medium was replaced with fresh DMEM containing 2% FBS and serial 2-fold diluted viral stocks, and incubated for 1 h at 37 C with shaking at 15-min intervals.Subsequently, each well was supplemented with 500 μL 2% FBS-and 0.9% carboxymethylcellulose-containing DMEM, and incubated for 4 days at 37 C. Afterwards, cells were fixed with 8% paraformaldehyde for 24 h at room temperature (RT), washed with double distilled water (ddH 2 O), and then stained with 0.5% crystal violet for plaque-forming unit (PFU) enumeration.

Virus inactivation and sample preparation

SARS-CoV-2 was heat inactivated following the method described previously (Batéjat et al.,

J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f

Journal Pre-proof 2021; Pastorino et al., 2020) . Briefly, viral suspensions were pipetted to 2-mL cone-bottom screw tubes (Axygen, SCT-200-C-S) and subjected to heat-treatment for 35 min at 65 C using a digital dry bath (Yingjiakeyi, China, MB200). To prepare mixtures containing both live and dead SARS-CoV-2, viable and heat-treated viruses were mixed at different volume ratios of 0:1, 1:9, 3:7, 1:1, 7:3, 9:1 and 1:0 to a total concentration of about 400 viral particles/mL.Journal Pre-proof with a resultant plaque assay result of 2 ± 1 and 8 ± 2 PFUs, respectively, indicating that the viruses were almost inactivated. Also, at △Cts ≥ 8.6 (meaning the virus was inactivated) no PFU was observed in the plaque assay. These results confirmed the sensitivity of the assay in detecting low viral load samples. Additionally, the correlation between △Cts and PFU in this experiment (Fig. 4) were almost similar to that in the mock experiment of Fig. 3 (i.e. In Fig. 3 , at a PFU of 56, the average △Ct was < 2.5. While in Fig. 4 , at a PFU of 55 ± 2 the average △Ct was also < 2.5). Exposure of SARS-CoV-2 at 4°C showed that the inactivation speed of SARS-CoV-2 was much slower. These observations were also consistent with previous reports (Marquès and Domingo, 2021; Riddell et al., 2020) .Journal Pre-proof to its high transmissibility, several studies have reported environmental samples to be PCR-positive for SARS-CoV-2 but failed to isolate infectious virions (Lednicky et al., 2020; Wölfel et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2021) . This is majorly because isolation of infectious SARS-CoV-2 needs cell culture in a BSL-3 facility that is not readily available in most countries or facilities (Lv et al., 2020) . At the same time, many countries have also reported cases of COVID-19 caused by contaminated goods (Han et al., 2021; Qu et al., 2020) .Therefore, it is important to establish a method that can rapidly indicate the risk of infectious SARS-CoV-2 in PCR-positive samples without the need of cell culture or a high-level biosafety facility.In the present study, we establish an SDS-PMA assisted RT-qPCR assay which can efficiently discriminate live and dead SARS-CoV-2 based on the difference in Ct (△Ct) values between the PMA-treated and the PMA-free groups. Under the optimized conditions, in our current study, the cutoff value of △Ct was set as 8.6, which indicates that △Cts less than 8.6 may mean a risk of infectious SARS-CoV-2 virus. The smaller the △Ct (commonly < 1), the higher the risk of infection by a SARS-CoV-2 RT-qPCR positive sample.It has been reported that PMA-coupled RT-qPCR can distinguish dead microorganisms from The results on the SARS-CoV-2 virus on the plastic surface at different temperatures were quite consistent with other studies using the traditional culture method (Marquès and Domingo, 2021; Riddell et al., 2020) , further demonstrating the potential of this method.

Optimization of PMA conjugation conditions

To find the best conditions for differentiating inactivate virus by PMA, heat-treated viruses detected using primer-specific RT-qPCR. From this, the membrane-destabilizer with the least effect on RT-qPCR was subjected to different PMA incubation temperatures (6, 16, 25, and 37 ℃) to determine its optimum incubation temperature. Each experiment was performed in triplicate.

RT-qPCR conditions

All RT-qPCR tests were carried out on a BioRad CFX96 instrument (BioRad, Shanghai, China) using a OneStep value for each sample was determined using the BioRad CFX Manager 3.1 software. Finally, all samples were tested by RT-qPCR after RNA extraction.

Statistical Analysis

Each experiment was performed in triplicate. All data were analyzed and graphically presented using GraphPad Prism version 6 (GraphPad, USA). Differences in Ct (△Ct) between PMA-treated groups (Ct (+PMA)) and PMA-free groups (Ct (-PMA)) were calculated and analyzed using one-way ANOVA after data was checked for normality and lognormality tests.showed that △Cts became smaller gradually with an increase in the ratio of live viruses (Fig. 3) .△Cts > 9 were observed for 100% dead virus, and △Cts ~0.9 was obtained for 100% live virus.These results proved that the SDS-PMA assisted RT-qPCR could be used to determine the possibility of infectious SARS-CoV-2 in PCR-positive samples. Because in our current system the △Cts for 100% inactivated SARS-CoV-2 viruses were 9.6 ± 1.0 (Fig. 2C) , a cut-off △Ct value of 8.6 (mean -SD) was set to indicate if a PCR-positive sample contains non-hazardous viruses or not. In other words, △Cts less than 8.6 may mean that there is a risk of infectious viruses.

SDS-PMA assisted RT-qPCR

To prove if the SDS-PMA assisted RT-qPCR assay could be used to detect live SARS-CoV-2 viruses in environmental samples, live viruses on plastic surface at different temperatures were tested at different times and the results compared to the gold standard plaque assay. As shown in Fig. 4A , △Cts increased gradually with an increase in duration time at all temperatures, with the highest rise in △Ct being observed at higher temperatures. These results were also concordant with the plaque assay results (Fig. 4B ). The number of plaques gradually decreased with an increase in duration time at all temperatures. Of note, at △Cts <8.6 (meaning the virus was infectious), visible plaques could also be observed in the plaque assay. Interestingly, after 3 h exposure at 37°C and 24 h at 20°C, △Cts became close to 8.6 (8.57 and 8.48 respectively)

Discussion

The gold standard RT-qPCR based detection method plays a key role in the global fight against COVID-19 by providing a reliable tool for early detection and timely isolation of individuals infected with SARS-CoV-2 . Increasing understanding of the ways through which SARS-CoV-2 virus is transmitted to humans, animals, environments, and goods packaging, especially cold chain goods, will help reduce and control the spread of SARS-CoV-2.SARS-CoV-2 is a highly contagious enveloped virus responsible for the COVID-19 pandemic (Yao et al., 2020) which has caused a devastating public health crisis in many countries. Owing

Conclusion

In conclusion, this study reports a rapid method based on SDS-PMA assisted RT-qPCR to efficiently distinguish infectious SARS-CoV-2 in PCR-positive samples. This culture-free method has a potential for food and feed monitoring during cold chain transportation, as well as environmental monitoring for effective prevention and control of SARS-CoV-2. The developed method can also be adapted in future surveys and outbreak investigations. heat-inactivated SARS-CoV-2 viruses were mixed in different proportions to a total concentration of 400 viral particles/mL and a survival rate of 0%, 10%, 30%, 50%, 70%, 90%and 100%, i.e., groups I to VII. 200 μL of each group (corresponding to 80 PFU) was subjected to SDS-PMA assisted qPCR detection. Differences in Ct value between PMA-treated and PMA-free groups are shown as means ± standard deviations. 

