

. Flow chart of the study participants.In this retrospective, observational study, the clinical data of consecutive Covid-19 patients who were hospitalized in our tertiary center were collected. In total, 148 Covid-19 patients were analyzed in this study (Fig. 1) . In all of the cases, Covid-19 infection was diagnosed based on the specific signs and symptoms or imaging findings in computerized thoracic tomography (CT) and confirmed by the RT-PCR test. The present study was registered into the Ministry of Health Scientific Research Covid-19 Committee. Then, the study was approved by the Local Ethics Committee (approval number: 2020/KK/133-2286). The assessment of cardiac troponin I was based on a latex-enhanced immunoturbidimetric assay. In our institution, the normal reference range of cardiac troponin I level was 0-30 ng/L. The primary outcome was the in-hospital all-cause mortality.During the in-hospital follow-up, 10 (6.7%) patients died. The sample size was categorized into two groups; survivors and nonsurvivors. Table 1 presents the clinical characteristics, admission symptoms, and laboratory findings of all Covid-19 patients. The frequency of male gender as well as presenting symptoms, including fever, cough, dyspnea, and diarrhea, were not different between the groups. Regarding to laboratory results, nonsurvivors had significantly elevated values of white blood cells (WBC) count, neutrophils, D-dimer, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), C-reactive protein (CRP), and troponin I levels, while their lymphocytes and albumin levels were significantly decreased. The imaging findings were indifferent for each group. The independent prognosticators of in-hospital death were established using univariable and multivariable LR analysis as displayed in Table 2 . In a multivariable analysis; only cardiac troponin I (OR: 1.110, 95%CI: 1.025-1.201, P = 0.010) and albumin were independent predictors of the in-hospital death for Covid-19 cases without cardiovascular risk factors. In a ROC analysis, the optimal value of cardiac troponin I in predicting in-hospital mortality was 24.2 ng/ with sensitivity of 90.0% and specificity of 85.0% (Fig. 2) . The Kaplan-Meier analysis displayed that Covid-19 cases with cardiac troponin I values of ≥24.2 ng/L had significantly higher rates of deaths compared to those with cardiac troponin I < 24.2 ng/L (Fig. 3 ).In the current study, we observed that after controlling of some possible confounders, myocardial injury, indicated by the elevation of cardiac troponin I level, is a strong predictor of in-hospital death in Covid-19 cases without cardiovascular risk factors. Based on the study results, we considered that admission cardiac troponin level should be treated as an important prognostic marker, thus patients with higher levels of admission troponin levels should be followed-up closer in order to predetermine Covid-19-associated complications. More aggressive treatment strategies, such as biologic agents or Covid-19 convalescent plasma, may be used earlier in order to decrease mortality due to Covid-19 infection in subjects with higher admission troponin levels. Continuous variables are presented as mean ± SD, nominal variables presented as frequency (%). 

