

Wheezing is one of the most common symptoms of respiratory disease in childhood, Epidemiologic studies from various countries have shown that 10-15'\, of infants in the first year of life and up to 25",, of children under 5 years of age present to their physician with wheezing respiratory illness (40, 67) . The majority of infants and young children with recurrent wheezy, lower respiratory tract symptoms are very likely to have asthma, regardless of age of onset, evidence of atopic disease, precipitating causes, or frequency of wheezing (71) , Since asthma in infancy can be confused with various other conditions which produce similar signs and symptoms, and physiologic changes, the initial evaluation of a wheezing infant should aim at the exclusion of alternative diagnoses.

Differential diagnosis

There is a wide variety of congenital and acquired conditions which result in narrowing of the intrathoracic airway and which present with cough and wheeze (Table 1), The differential diagnoses of alternative diseases which present with wheezing can be established by clinical history, physical examination, laboratory investigations, and response to treatment (27),

Clinieal history

A different set of diagnoses should be considered when obstructive symptoms present in the neonatal period, when underlying congenital abnormality should be strongly suspected. Prematurity, particularly if associated with the need for mechanical ventilatory support and frequent suctioning, may lead to tracheal or bronchial stenosis secondary to granulation tissue scarring or the development of bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD). Previous surgery for a tracheoesophageal fistula suggests tracheomalacia, gastroesophageal reflux (GER), and recurrent fistula as possible causes of wheezing. Recurrent choking or coughing associated with difficulties of sucking and swallowing should suggest pulmonary complications of inhalation. Vomiting and regurgitation may be the initial symptoms in the patient with esophageal malfunction, i,e,, GER, which may also present with the sudden onset of choking/ coughing characteristic of foreign-body aspiration.Ihe age ofthe patient at the onset of symptoms, i.e., whether they are associated with crackles or with less than 18-24 months, and the season of the year brassy-sounding cough, and whether the child seems at prcscnlation, i.e., winter or spring, should suggest to be chronically ill (55) . This will be helpful in difviral bronchiolitis as the cause ofthe wheezing (26).ferentiating localized from diffuse obstruction, and pneumonitis from upper airway obstruction, and will ,, , . also help in assessing the possibility of chronic lung rhvstcal examinaiion ,. ^ r diseases. I he physical cxaminalion of an infant with respira-The associated symptoms and signs in the wheezy t<M-\ disiress should first distinguish bctv\ccn lower infant th.at are helpful in differential diagnosis are air\\a\ obstructive disease, which classicalK pre-outlined in 1 able 2. scnts with whee/inu and cniphxscina. and disorders priinarilx involving the upper airua>s. uhich usualK i^ahoraiorv investii.uinofi present with inspirator) stridor (b2). I he pediatrician should next determine whether \«.hce/es arc uni-There arc few labt>rator\ investigations that are uselateral Ol" sunnictric, inonophonic or polxphonic, ful in the initial evaiuation ofthe wheezy infant. Rtnitino st-rotogic le.sts ma> help to evaluate the eventual presence of an active infectious process, i.e., T,j;iif' 2 C' ini.;ii i",itiire,i'-vvhw?in(i int;)n't'i;ii-irf-ntrptiii,', .' :ifferent,,iUiiaqriosis specific aiitiniicrc^bial assa\s, or an immune deficiencx state, i.e., scrum lmmunoglobulin quantita- ni'lrir'T* ''vi'ii-ii' "["h!'' .' -. ,s Pertussis nia\ often bc mistaken for asthma in this aec group: a careful ciMisideration of this possibilitŷ ' hnm,rtii^i"'i''-'-n.i^iri'^'r'ie w.ux i G^H ^ti^uki includc an assessment of Kniphocytosis and s'-viiii'Liuin-vw!''"'' ' '" "' ' ""'" "^ ' appropriaic cultures of nasc^phar>ngeal and respira-Reai,Mi!ci!i(Mi v,-'mi;,M,-tor> secretions m the carlx stage of the disease. Since h Pr,=T,mi(it\ -"wt-I-'-i,'\i'-'r\-vsriasii "''" cultures and llucircsccnt antibod} tests are almost Vtvh.mk,! u':ri,ii,.-r' alw;i_\s negative aftci 4-5 weeks of symptoms, the -^ii;)"ii(iijv.,H(. !'l''^.;\ cn/} inc-!inkcd imnuino.stjrbcnt assay for detection 6 Si.riu-r ons." 11 ..iKiii .-.M .;." -^rpij •;•.' .--. uMictic" of aiuibodv to pertussis toviii or filamentous hemarr.^^^,.s^ iH,;,!tii\ .|.',-•,• ggluiinin s!K)uld bc performed for diagnosis. '"'''''"•""'•'i" I wo important and soinetimes overlooked diag-T ,i;;' iei>es.nih:ir.erfi f' stuiri initial presenting s)inptoin of both pulmonary tuberculosis (4) and c)stic fibrosis (30 struction, the curves become concave and V^,.j^ FRC decreases. Moreover, as in older children with asthma response, bronchodilator and bronchoconstrictor stimuli can be assessed (42) , Besides reversible airway obstruction, other information can be obtained by the flow-volume loop, A flattened inspiratory phase suggests an airway obstruction localized above the vocal cords -laryngomalacia, for example -while flattening of the expiratory limb is characteristic of intrathoracic airway obstruction as in tracheomalacia (3), Other ways to assess the severity of infant respiratory disease and the efficacy of bronchodilator therapy are resistance measurements and evaluation of functional residual capacity by body plethysmography or gas dilution. This last technique can be used to evaluate gas mixing, which is a sensitive indicator of obstructive lung disease in infants,, children, and adults. Useful information can be obtained by monitoring the respiratory rate during quiet sleep by capnography or measuring nasal thermal changes, and by measuring chest wall motion by respiratory inductance plethysmography. The quantitation of the tidal expiratory flow pattern as the ratio of the time to peak tidal expiratory flow (Tme) divided b} the expiratory time (Te), 7"me/Te, may show low values in obstructive lung disease and abnormally shaped tidal expiratory flow-time curves (1), In infants with recurrent or persistent wheezing who have not had previous radiologie investigation, a posterior and lateral chest radiograph is strongly indicated to exclude parenchymal lung disease, as well as congenital anomalies of the lung, cardiac diseases, and foreign bodies (76) , The barium swallow procedure with careful observation of swallowing is indicated if the plain chest radiograph is inconclusive and there remains a suspicion of recurrent inhalation or anatomic abnormalities. Persistent wheezing which is unresponsive or poorly responsive to appropriate treatment should be investigated by fiber-optic or rigid hronchoscopy (88, 89), The now standard pediatric flexible bronchoscope is 3,5 mm in diameter with a 1,2-mm internal suction channel. Although it is quite possible to perform flexible bronchoscopy with this instrument in small infants, including premature infants, the added airway resistance limits the duration of the procedure to rather short times. Very thin flexible bronchoscopes (1.8 and 2,3 mm in diameter, and 2.7 mm in diameter with distal angulation) appear to be a signiflcant new elinieal tool for observation of airway dynamics with relatively little mechanical interference also if inserted through existing endotracheal or tracheostomy tubes (88), Diagnostic flexible bronchoscopy IS indicated in speciflc conditions such as stridor, persistent atelectasis, wheezing, recurrent pulmonary infiltrates, lung lesions of unknown cause. chronic cough, and hemoptysis, and to assess injury from toxic or milk inhalation. The 3-5-mm-diameter instrument can be used to obtain samples or aspiration of airway secretions and mucous plugs (88), The rigid bronchoscope is more suitable for the removal of foreign bodies, excision of granulation tissue, and examination of tracheoesophageal fistulas (89),

Response to treatment

The final diagnostic criterion is a trial of appropriate asthma therapy (16), Nevertheless, there remains much controversy about the use of (3 2 adrenergic agents in wheezing infants (35. 60), Howe\'er. it has been observed that the failure of some studies to demonstrate beneficial response may be due to a number of potential methodologic problems. These include the use of sedation, the stud}' of patients in the recovery phase of the disease when bronchospasm may not be the prominent component of the bronchoconstriction. and finally the assessment of airway responsiveness with parameters unlikely to be sufficiently sensitive to detect bronchodilation (6), Recent studies of infants with acute asthma have shown that the administration of nebulized P2 ''^%'^ñ ists results in improved clinical score in the majority of patients studied (5. 6), Furthermore, in infants with persistent symptoms, trial of an inhaled steroid is indicated. Both budesonide (8) and beclomethasone dipropionate (22) administered by aerosol and mask resulted in significant clinical improvement, less concomitant medication use. and fewer admissions to hospital in children aged, respectively, 11 -36 and 12-26 months. The combination of inhaled (3-. agonist and inhaled steroid has been shown to be effective for acute wheezing in children up to 18 months of age (16), Data on sodium cromoglycate in this age group are limited (25),

Bronchiolitis and other viral infections

Viral lower respiratory tract infections are the commonest cause of wheezing in infants. The airway caliber in infants is small; therefore, mucosal edema following viral infection is relatively more constricting than in older children and more prone to cause wheezing. Improved viral isolation techniques from aspiration o{ nasal secretion and the application of immunofluorescence or polymerase chain reaction technology have suggested an age-dependent relationship between wheezing and viral infections: respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and coronavirus are isolated more frequently in association with wheezing in younger children, influenza A and adenovirus in older children, and rhinovirus in children of all ages, Bronchiolitis is a primary clinical disorder.being the tirsl episode of acute wheezing in a child Reeent studies of the differentiation of the THl less than 2 years of age. Hyperinflation, bronehial and TH2 lymphocyte populations suggest that inwall thickening, and areas of collapse-consolidation fections appear to activate mainly the TH 1 subset of are the most frequently observed radiographie ab-T-helper cells, preventing the proliferation of TH2 normalities (.50). In the very rare patients who do not cell populations which promote B-cell IgE producimprove and who have persistent radiographic ab-tion (54) . The suggestion that severe viral infections normalities, obliterative bronchiolitis should be sus-may damage the airways, making them more likely pected and confirmed by hronchography. \ entilation to develop asthma (33, 38), has not been definitely perfusion scans, high-resolution c()mputed tomogra-shown in children not otherwise predisposed to dephy (7), and, occasionally, lung biopsy (50) .velop the disease (32. 33). It has been suggested that viral infections may promote or increase the chance of atopic sensitiza-, ; ; • , tion (10). Welliver et al. showed that 7()-8()",, of patients lesponded to RSV with Igl: bound to ex-Inhalation or aspiration of foreign substances, i.e.. foliated nasopharyngeal epithelial cells in the first 2 food or exogenous materials (see below), is an lm-da\s after infection, but only those uith persistent portant and frequenth unrecognized cause of recur-Igl: developed clinical bronchiolitis (78) . They found rent wheezing in young children, and many of these higher levels of anti-RSV Iglv in the nasal secretions patients ma) be considered to have difficult-toof patients with wheezing illness compared with ill-control "asthma'" (53). ness without wheezing during both acute and con-Disordered sucking and swallowing, esophageal \alescent stages of viral infectit)n (80). Recurrent malfunction with regurgitation into the pharynx, and episodes (^f whee/mg were obseived almost exclu-abnormal communication between the airways and sively in infants with the highest nasal Igl: response alimentary tract are common causes of recurrent (79) . However, it is prematurf} to conclude that inhalation of milk, other gastric contents, and foodvirus-specific Igl: is causa! in this prcK'ess. It is also stuff. The presence of lower respiratory tract symppossible that an immutiologic deficiency such as lov\ toms in patients with a predisposing condition should !e\eis o( IgCi 1 and Ig(j2. predisposes some infants arouse the suspicion of inhalation-induced disease. t(^ the development o'i a more sexere infection o\^ The first diagnostic step is to observe the child dur-RSV and to ftill clinical expression o{ bronchiolitis ing feeding for difficulty with sucking or swallowing. (12). This has also heen shown to be strongl} asso-the appearance of fatigue or loss of interest in feedciated with passive stiioking: hospital admission for tng after the first few ounces, tachypnea, or apnca infants wtth bronchic^litis ts [iu)re frequent if tiie (29). The classic finding of coughing with feeding mother smokes (56) . max be absent owing to depression of the cough There is alst> \et\ Itttle epidemiok\utc support for reflex from repeated stimulation of the sensitive rethe suggeslioM that viruses can potentiate sensitiza-ceptors in the larynx and trachea. Furthermore, if tion to other alletgens (23). hi a prospective stud\ on the amount of milk or food inhaled is small, it may the de\ elopmenl (^f allergic diseases in children born be difficult to associate the respiratory symptoms vvitli ai least one atopic parent, respirator} tract in-with feeding. fecthMis were ies.s common ni the first vear of life of If the histor} and physical examination are sugthoseehildren who developed aiopie symptoms (14).gestive. a chest radiograph should be performed. A lower pre\ alence o\~ asthma and alop\ was ob-Findings \ary from infiltrates in dependent areas served in ehtkltefi li\ ing m the former l:ast Ger-such as the right upper lobe in infants who inhale in many, where the\ were exposed early to day-care tlie supine position, and the lower lobes in older settings and eotisequentl> to \iral infections com-ehildren who usually inhale in the upright position, pared with ehildren li\ ing in the fortuer W est Get"-Although there is often hyperinflation, the chest many (74) . In thts eounti->. an inverse reiationsliip radiograph may be eompletely normal. The next between sibship size and the prevalence of one or diagnostie step is the barium esophagogram, which more positive skin-priek tests to common aeroaller-allows evaluation of the swallowing mechanism and gens has been reported (75) . Moreover, the preva-direct visualization of any aspiration of radiolence of hay fewer and eezenia throughout childhood contrast medium into the trachea. However, this is is gteater in the firstborn ehild than in younger sib-an insensitive diagnostic test for GFR. Continuous lings: the more older siblings present in the family.pH monitoring of the lower esophagus, esophagosthe less the probabilitv of an atopic diagnosis (68) . copy, and esophageal biopsy are the best diagnostic The most logical explanation o\^ these obser\ ations procedures in this ease (49) . Radionuclide seintigls that infections acquired by household eontact in raphy (milk scan) offers a physiologic approach and early life protect against the subsequent develop-allows detection of both GFR and aspiration. Along nient of atopic symptoms (69) .recording time considerably increases the sensitivity of the method with no further radiation exposure immunoreactive trypsin assay (IRT) is a major ad- (41, 72) . Although qualitative assessment of the pres-vance, providing a laboratory diagnostic procedure ence of lipid-laden macrophages in bronchial wash-with 99'\, sensitivity and a false-positive rate of only ing may be a helpful nonspecific finding, quantitation 0.2-0.5",, (81). If undiagnosed at birth, because oC of these cells has been claimed to be a better test for parental reluctance to participate in widespread neothe diagnosis of recurrent aspiration of milk in chil-natal screening programs, most children may present dren (15).in the first year of life with the onset of recurrent respiratory symptoms and failure to thrive. It was Forei^n-hodv luhalation ^^^"^ '^'^' -^"" .^^ '""'^ infants have recurrent or persistent wheezing owing to dmuse small airway A history of sudden onset of symptoms in a previ-disease (30). Therefore, w heezing appears to be more ously healthy child, wheezing in localized areas of common among infants with CF than among the the lung fields, and evidence of collapse or unilateral normal population. Thus, a sweat chloride test should hyperinflation with mediastinal shift, are suggestive be performed both in the newborn infant with posifeatures (31). Usually the diagnosis is made within tive IRT as a confirmatory test as well as in any 1-7 days because the ingestion is often witnessed by infant with recurrent wheezing whether or not sympthe parents or earers in most infants (52) . However.toms of malabsorption are present, a delay in diagnosis may occur due to unobserved aspiration, or failure to appreciate the importance of ^ ,. , ,. , , 1 r 1,1 Cardiovascular anomalies symptoms by the parents or, less frequently, by the physician (83). Foreign bodies are more frequently Cardiae conditions with large left to right cardiovasswallowed than inhaled (52) . In the esophagus, they cular shunts can result in a distended pulmonary most frequently cause dysphagia but may also cause arterv' and or enlarged left atrium which mav comw heezing and cough owing to tracheal compression.press large airways and eause wheezing (44) . More-The radiologic investigation should include the re-over, the distension of the pulmonary vascular bed gion from the mouth to below the diaphragm. A as a consequence of left ventricular failure or obnegative radiologic investigation does not exclude a structed pulmonary veins may result in bronchiolar foreign body, and if the clinical features suggest this wall edema with increased peripheral resistanee and possibility, bronchoscopy should be performed.wheezing. Clinical and radiologic evidence of eardiac disease should be pursued with further investi-BronchopulnwmvT dvspkma (BPDi -^^'^f ^ mc^luding electrocardiography, echocard.ography. and angiography. Those responsible for such BPD is defined as a respiratory disorder after infants should have a high index of suspicion beacute neonatal injury with incomplete recoverv cause obstructed pulmonarv' venous return may be as determined by significant clinical, radiologic. present in the absence of cardiac murmurs and carand blood gas abnormalities (arterial oxvgen diomegaly (55) . pressure< 60 mmHg in room air) beyond 28 days of Vascular rings are another rare cause of tracheal postnatal age (48) . Although the cause is not known and or esophageai compression in infants and chilwith certainty, the condition is most commonly seen dren (Table 1) . In most patients, this malformation in premature infants w ho require assisted v entilation appears earlv' in life, and respiratory symptoms are and oxygen therapy. Improvement of lung function more common than evidence of esophageal obstrucusually occurs during the first year of life. However.tion. Stridor is the most common symptom in these recurrent wheezing and respiratory difficulties may patients, but wheezing, respiratory distress, recurpersist into early childhood and may be aggravated rent respirator} infections, or reflex apnea may also by the bronehial hyperreactivity and GER which are be present. In order to maintain a certain degree of commonly seen in these patients. The radiographic traeheal patency, these infants tend to lie with their manifestations of the disease include patchy areas of necks hyperextended. Neck flexion may reproduce atelectasis. hyperinflation, and fibrosis (47) . The symptoms and is usually resisted by the child since "bubbly'' appearance with diffuse streaks of infil-it aggravates the obstruction. The diagnostic aptrate and widespread cystic change in the lung may proaeh to such infants ineludes chest roentgenograsuggest Wilson-Mikity syndrome.phy followed by barium swallow study, which usually provides sufficient information to predict v\ hether Cystic fihrosis (CF) '^^ ^^ right thoracotomy is indicated (73) . Although invasive angiography may delineate vascular detail. Recently, newborn-screening programs have been noninvasive techniques such as Doppler and colorintroduced which allow the diagnosis of CF shortly How imaging (9). as well as fast computed tomoafterbirthbeforetheonset of clinical symptoms. The graphy and magnetic resonance imaging (17), are vveli suited to demonstrate the tracheoesophageal include agenesis, atresia, webs, intrinsic stenosis, or anatomy in addition to the presence of a vascular external compression by mediastinal masses, anomaring.lous vessels, or tracheoesophageal fistulas (37) . The tracheobronchial tree may be abnormally compliant .due to a deficiency of the cartilage support of the • ^^ ^^'•'' ^"^' '"'''''''<'* trachea (tracheomalacia) or bronchi (bronchomala-Mcdiasiinal masses such as tumors, thymic lesions. cia, congenital lobar emphysema). This condition bronchogcnic and enterogenic cysts, angiomatous may be localized in one segment or generalized, prilesions. and enlarged lymph nodes causing tracheal mary or secondary to compression or infection or bronchia] compression may present with cough (11.82). and persistent wheeze. The onset of symptoms may Any abnormal primary disease of the tracheobronbe gradual or acute, associated with manifestations chial tree, with abnormal compliance, should be (){' systemic disease and cervical or superclavicular considered in the differential diagnosis only after Iymphadenopathy. As many as one-third of all me-external compression and localized causes of airway diastinal masses are asympionuttic and are discov-obstruction have been excluded. These diagnoses ered incidentally (20). .Although a chest radiograph may be difficult on plain chest film since some dewill usually reveal the mass, some bronchogenic cysts gree of dynamic collapse of the trachea occurs noroftcn may not be visible on plain radiographs, which mally during crying episodes and normal expiration wili usuallv displav unilateral hyperinflation, leading (46) . The barium s\\allow study may be the next lo ct)nrusion with congenital lobar cmph} sema. In step. but. usually, laryngobronchoscopy is necessary tliis case, the failtirc to make the correct diagnosis for proper diagnosis. Again, the tracheal collapse may lead to an unnecessary resection of normal lung ma\ be missed if rigid ventilating bronchoscopy extissue (19). The appropriate investigation in such amination is performed while the patient is under cases IS ihc barium swallow sltidy. which localizes general anesthesia and no spontaneous inspirations the mass according to pressure effects on esophageal can be visualized. Performance of flexible fiber-optic conlotir. Computed tomograpli\ ma\ also be help-bronchoscopy in infants who are spontaneously ful in distingtiishing st)lid from cystic lesions, and breathing and sedated can be more informative in magnclic resonance imaging ma\ pro\ ide additional this situation. The trachea and the bronchi may be specific diagni'tstic detail in the delineation of the seen to collapse during expiration, or a pulsatile coiUcnt of Ihc cystic lesion and the location of the compressing vessel can be identified. In addition, mass in relation lo other anatomic slrtictures. Ultra-inualuminal anomalies will be identified with this sotind ma\ be useful in delecting mt>tit)n or pulsation procedure. Bronchoscopy. however, may be hazard-o\' a \ascular anomalx (13). Bronchi>scopy may be ous in infants with congenital lobar emphysema behclptul in locating the site of airwa\ compression catise anesthesia may cause further air trapping in (76, 8<S). As described prcMotisly. m the assessment the affected lobe with consequent impairment of the ofmcdiaslinal adcnopalln, ttiberctilin skin testing is already limited respiratory function. However, the mandalor\. as \\ell as the exalualion of urinary ex-typicalradiologicfindingandtheexclusionofbronchocrcln)n of \anili>lmandclic acid (VMA) for diagno-gemc cyst wili allow precise diagnosis. sis (^!" nctirouenic itimors.

Auoiiialics of ihc inichcohyonclmil ircc the label '^asthma''? What is going to

Anomalies of the iracheobronchiai tree may cause change in the next few years?respiratory distress, lite-threatening apncic spells, re-In infants and toddlers, asthma is likely to be a current pneumonia, cough, dyspnea, cyanosis, and heterogeneous group of conditions which share the wheezing (37) . In general, symptoms are increased clinical findings of wheezing and respiratory distress b\ activit\ and iniercurrent infection. Inspirator} and some common risk factors such as exposure to slridor is the main symptom of laryngeal obstruc-passive smoking, difficult living conditions, and intion. which is occasionalK characterized also by creased risk for boys (43) . inspirator} and expiralor} wheezing. Harsh, brass}-In the past, terms such as "wheezy bronchitis'', sounding cough, inspiratory and expiratory wheez-"asthmatoid bronchitis", and "spastic bronchitis" ing. and apneic spells are most prominent in tracheal have been used to describe wheezing in the very obstruction. InspiraU>r} and prolonged expiratory young. The term "asthma" was avoided because epiwhecze. expectoration of mucopus. and variable de-sodic wheeze triggered by a viral infection in early grees ol brcathlessness associated with focal h}per-childhood had a more benign prognosis than the inflation or collapse of the lung are t} pical of bron-disease in older children precipitated by a number of chiai problems. Trachea! and bronchial anomalies other factors in addition to viral infection (24, 59).The label "asthma" was used mainly in older children when aeroallergen responsiveness had begun. This distinction was later found to be associated with both underdiagnosis of asthma and its inappropriate treatment with antibiotics (2, 34, 63). Consequently, pediatric pulmonologists suggested that all wheezing in infancy and early childhood should be labeled asthma (71) . This resulted in more appropriate treatment with bronchodilators and antiinflammatory agents and in reduced morbidity, but also, as stated by Wilson, in "a loss of pathophysiological precision which may have implications that are not purely academic" (84). Although wheezing lower respiratory tract illness in early childhood and asthma share some common risk factors, sufficient data exist to show that their relative importance differs between each condition (61, 64. 85) . Several indices of neonatal lung function are reduced in infants who subsequently develop episodes of wheezing associated with viral infection (39, 70) . Evidence does not link wheezing in the first 2 years of life with atopy (28). In contrast, most schoolchildren with asthma are atopic, and the severity of the disease in this age group is clearly related to the degree of atopic sensitization (90). Wheezy infants have been shown to have a level of airway responsiveness which is the same in young infants (66) or decreased in 3-year-olds (86) compared with controls. Instead, atopy and increased bronchial hyperresponsiveness are two markers often found to be associated with asthma at school age and beyond (57, 58) . Furthermore, the pattern of wheeze is episodic with prolonged symptom-free periods in early life and both episodic and intercurrent symptoms in atopic schoolchild asthma (61. 85). Moreover, the medium-term prognosis of the episodic viral wheeze of the first 2 years of life is excellent in the vast majority of subjects since very few of them develop childhood asthma (21. 51, 65). As Silverman reported, "the differences between viral induced wheezing of early childhood and atopic schoolchild asthma are so striking that one can only conclude that the two disorders are totally independent" (61) . Thus, the disorder of many recurrent!} wheezing mfants and toddlers could be labeled "wheezy bronchitis" rather than "asthma" (36, 61. 64, 84, 85). However, "wheezy bronchitis" is more a description of symptoms than a diagnosis, and probably we should use the term "asthma syndrome" until the pathophysiology of the disorder has been fully clarified in all the pediatric ages. Because asthma is an underdiagnosed problem, it could be dangerous to avoid the term "asthma" and the word "syndrome" can be used to describe the set of symptoms and signs which occur together in wheezing children.The acquisition of more precise information will be made possible in the near future by the development of new techniques in the evaluation of pulmonary function, not only in infants but also in children of preschool age. The full potential of this investigational tool is still unrealized because of the lack of standardized methods and reference values obtained from sufficient numbers of subjects. A number of problems must be resolved in the coming years before measurements of pulmonary function in infants can be recommended for wide clinical use in healthy and sick infants. The potential sources of variation in the measurements need to be characterized and limited m order to obtain reproducible results, which, we must remember, are difficult to interpret and can be obtained w ith a certain degree of reliability only after substantial training with the different techniques. For this reason, we must develop training programs m infant lung function testing, at least for simple noninvasive methods which could be used as an objective epidemiologic tool. The advances occurritig in cellular and molecular biology, together with the development of skills m "spelunking in the pediatric airways" (87). by means of the flexible fiber-optic bronchoscope. will allow detailed evaluation of the anatomy and physiology of the airways with relatively little mechanical interference.

Conclusion

Asthma has recently been defined as "a chronic inflammatory disorder of the airw ays in which many cells play a role, in particular mast cells and eosinophils. In susceptible individuals, this inflammation causes symptoms which are usually associated w ith widespread but variable airflow obstruction that is often reversible either spontaneously or with treatment, and causes an associated increase in airway responsiveness to a variety of stimuli" (45) . Because of the scanty information concerning the pathology of asthma in pediatric patients, the concept of eosinophil-mediated airway inflammation was not incorporated in the definition of asthma recent!} elaborated by an international committee of pediatric pu!mono!ogists (77) . Therefore, pediatricians are sti!! using a vague definition of the disorder (76) . Now we are again in the midd!e of a debate between two distinct schoo!s of thought: whether wheezing in infancy and wheezing in later chi!dhood are distinct clinical entities of distinct etiology, or whether they are caused by a common under!ying defect. Although recent studies (61, 64, 84, 85 ) support the first thesis, information concerning the pathophysiologic characteristics of the two conditions is !imited. This is true not only of wheezing in infants but also in school-age asthmatic children. The distinction between the episodic viral wheeze (wheezy bronchitis) and the atopic wheeze (asthma) will allow a better definition of the anatomy and the physiology of the airways in the two conditions but will carry the risk of undertreatment. as previously observed (2. 63), Until more information is generated, the term "asthma syndrome" could be used to label both viraland allergen-induced asthma in children. However. a wide range of congenital and acquired disorders associated with wheezing (Table 1) should be excluded by clinical history, physical e.xamination. and laboratory tests. The erroneous inclusion of all wheezing within the "asthma syndrome'" will be a dramatic backward step for both the generation of scientific knowledge and the application of appropriate treatment. 

